![](126505018X.jpg)

[]{#cover.xhtml}

![](126505018X.jpg)

[]{#title.xhtml}

![](title.jpg)

[]{#copy.xhtml}

[]{#copy.xhtml#page_iv type="pagebreak"}Copyright © 2023, 2013, 2008 by
VitalSmarts, LLC. All rights reserved. Except as permitted under the
Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication may be reproduced or
distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or
retrieval system, without the prior written permission of publisher.

ISBN: 978-1-26-505018-4\
MHID:     1-26-505018-X

The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this
title: ISBN: 978-1-26-505119-8, MHID: 1-26-505119-4.

eBook conversion by codeMantra\
Version 1.0

All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than
put a trademark symbol after every occurrence of a trademarked name, we
use names in an editorial fashion only, and to the benefit of the
trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the trademark.
Where such designations appear in this book, they have been printed with
initial caps.

McGraw Hill eBooks are available at special quantity discounts to use as
premiums and sales promotions or for use in corporate training programs.
To contact a representative, please visit the Contact Us page at
[www.mhprofessional.com](http://www.mhprofessional.com).

TERMS OF USE

This is a copyrighted work and McGraw Hill ("McGraw Hill") and its
licensors reserve all rights in and to the work. Use of this work is
subject to these terms. Except as permitted under the Copyright Act of
1976 and the right to store and retrieve one copy of the work, you may
not decompile, disassemble, reverse engineer, reproduce, modify, create
derivative works based upon, transmit, distribute, disseminate, sell,
publish or sublicense the work or any part of it without McGraw Hill's
prior consent. You may use the work for your own noncommercial and
personal use; any other use of the work is strictly prohibited. Your
right to use the work may be terminated if you fail to comply with these
terms.

THE WORK IS PROVIDED "AS IS." McGRAW HILL AND ITS LICENSORS MAKE NO
GUARANTEES OR WARRANTIES AS TO THE ACCURACY, ADEQUACY OR COMPLETENESS OF
OR RESULTS TO BE OBTAINED FROM USING THE WORK, INCLUDING ANY INFORMATION
THAT CAN BE ACCESSED THROUGH THE WORK VIA HYPERLINK OR OTHERWISE, AND
EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ANY WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

McGraw Hill and its licensors do not warrant or guarantee that the
functions contained in the work will meet your requirements or that its
operation will be uninterrupted or error free. Neither McGraw Hill nor
its licensors shall be liable to you or anyone else for any inaccuracy,
error or omission, regardless of cause, in the work or for any damages
resulting therefrom. McGraw Hill has no responsibility for the content
of any information accessed through the work. Under no circumstances
shall McGraw Hill and/or its licensors be liable for any indirect,
incidental, special, punitive, consequential or similar damages that
result from the use of or inability to use the work, even if any of them
has been advised of the possibility of such damages. This limitation of
liability shall apply to any claim or cause whatsoever whether such
claim or cause arises in contract, tort or otherwise.

[]{#ded.xhtml}

[]{#ded.xhtml#page_v type="pagebreak"}We dedicate this book to great
leaders everywhere---to those who have not only added to an ever-growing
knowledge of how people change but also restored hope, inspired action,
and made it possible for each of us to amplify our influence to change
the world for good.

Along with this collective dedication, we add our love and gratitude for
one leader in particular. Our friend, coauthor, and colleague, Kerry
Patterson (1946--2022), dedicated his life to bettering the lives of
others. We, therefore, dedicate this expression of his hard-earned
wisdom to him.[]{#ded.xhtml#page_vi type="pagebreak"}

[]{#contents.xhtml}

[]{#contents.xhtml#page_vii type="pagebreak"}CONTENTS {#contents.xhtml#contents .h2}
-----------------------------------------------------

[Acknowledgments](#ack.xhtml#ack)

[PART 1](#part1.xhtml#part1)

[**HOW THE WORLD WORKS---AND HOW TO CHANGE IT**](#part1.xhtml#part1)

**[1   Leadership Is Influence](#ch1.xhtml#ch1)**

**[2   The Three Keys to Influence](#ch2.xhtml#ch2)**

[PART 2](#part2.xhtml#part2)

[**THE SIX SOURCES OF INFLUENCE**](#part2.xhtml#part2)

**[3   Help Them Love What They Hate](#ch3.xhtml#ch3)**

*Source 1: Personal Motivation*

**[4   Help Them Do What They Can't](#ch4.xhtml#ch4)**

*Source 2: Personal Ability*

**[5   Provide Encouragement](#ch5.xhtml#ch5)**

*Source 3: Social Motivation*

**[6   Provide Assistance](#ch6.xhtml#ch6)**

*Source 4: Social Ability*

**[7   Reward with Care](#ch7.xhtml#ch7)**

*Source 5: Structural Motivation*

[]{#contents.xhtml#page_viii type="pagebreak"}**[8   Change the
Environment](#ch8.xhtml#ch8)**

*Source 6: Structural Ability*

**[9   Become a Leader](#ch9.xhtml#ch9)**

[Notes](#notes.xhtml#notes)

[Index](#notes.xhtml#notes)

[]{#ack.xhtml}

[]{#ack.xhtml#page_ix type="pagebreak"}ACKNOWLEDGMENTS {#ack.xhtml#ack .h2}
------------------------------------------------------

We are deeply grateful to many who have helped us throughout the years
in our research, teaching, testing, and learning.

First, our appreciation to our families for your influence on us. Thanks
for the love and support that has changed us, inspired us, and enabled
us. Thank you particularly for your sacrifice and patience when we were
far from home---or at home, but overly focused, head down over a
keyboard.

Second, thanks to our colleagues, associates, and team members at
Crucial Learning who help in hundreds of ways---working to achieve our
mission, serving customers, training the skills to help change lives,
and supporting one another with care, loyalty, and competence. To all,
we say thanks. A special thanks to Bruce Bennett, a gifted
organizational expert who helped conceive the model of the six sources
of influence.

Third, a special thanks to Chase McMillan, Mindy Waite, and Mary
McChesney, whose love of, belief in, and intrepid effort for this
project made it far more than it would otherwise be. Chase maneuvered us
into many of the most important case studies in this book. Mindy labored
meticulously to bring clarity, simplicity, and beauty to the text. And
Mary gave inspired vision and project leadership to the entire effort.
Much of what is good in the present book is a credit to these three.

And fourth, we're overwhelmingly grateful to our friends and partners
across the planet who have turned these ideas from an interesting read
into a global force for positive change. We are inspired by the soul and
skill they bring to our cooperative effort.[]{#ack.xhtml#page_x
type="pagebreak"}

[]{#part1.xhtml}

[]{#part1.xhtml#page_1 type="pagebreak"}PART I {#part1.xhtml#part1 .h2pn}
----------------------------------------------

HOW THE WORLD WORKS---AND HOW TO CHANGE IT {.h2pt}
------------------------------------------

![Images](common.jpg)[]{#part1.xhtml#page_2 type="pagebreak"}

[]{#ch1.xhtml}

[]{#ch1.xhtml#page_3 type="pagebreak"}1 {#ch1.xhtml#ch1 .h2n}
---------------------------------------

LEADERSHIP IS INFLUENCE {.h2t}
-----------------------

*Influence is the common need embedded in almost everything we care
about. If it involves people, it's an influence problem.*

It wasn't the most harrowing research junket we had ever taken. Nothing
like earlier adventures in our influence research to some of the more
dangerous parts of the world. No threat of deadly parasites, no fear of
being kidnapped, no wrangling with corrupt politicians.

This time, our research took us to New York City to one of the Big
Apple's finest restaurants where, as part of our demanding research
regime, we'd be tossing back tasty appetizers while chatting with a
brilliant restaurateur. (It was a tough job, but someone had to do it.)
This was all part of an ongoing project to discover how remarkable
leaders leverage thoughtful influence of human behavior to achieve big
results.

The person we visited on this particular day was Danny Meyer. Danny
earned our attention by gaining top ratings on most major customer
[]{#ch1.xhtml#page_4 type="pagebreak"}review sites for a diverse group
of restaurants---for *decades*. You might suspect that his continued
success results from hiring better people, designing more beautiful
spaces, buying better ingredients, or crafting better dishes. But Meyer
is convinced these have little to do with their success. He assures us
that his competitors hire from the same labor pool, shop with the same
vendors, and produce similarly delicious food. What distinguishes Union
Square Hospitality Group restaurants, according to Danny Meyer, is not
places and products; it is behavior. Danny's hallmark capacity is his
ability to influence 1,500 employees to consistently create
extraordinary experiences for their 100,000 daily guests.

![Images](Grenny_0101.jpg)

Danny Meyer: "My job is to influence 1,500 people to create special
experiences for 100,000 customers every day."

For example, a woman frantically rushed through the entrance of Gramercy
Tavern, one of Danny's establishments located in the Flatiron District
of Manhattan. The potential diner was distraught because she
[]{#ch1.xhtml#page_5 type="pagebreak"}had left her purse in the taxi
that dropped her off. The blood drained from the woman's face as she
realized that not only would she probably never see her purse again, but
she also had no way to pay for the meal for the clients she was hosting.

An employee (let's call him Carlo) noticed the stranger's look of panic,
learned of her problem, and urged her to relax and join her party---who
were already seated and waiting for her.

"Don't worry about paying," Carlo comforted her. "We'll settle up some
other time. For now, please enjoy yourself. In the meantime, what is
your phone number?"

Surmising that the frantic customer had likely left her phone in her
purse, Carlo asked a colleague to repeatedly call the number. Thirty
minutes later when the taxi driver finally heard the ring and answered
the call, he was many miles north in the Bronx. Carlo then flashed the
Batman signal onto the side of a building to summon the Caped
Crusader . . .

OK, the Batman thing isn't true, . . . but what Carlo did do was still
quite heroic. He arranged to meet the taxi halfway between the Gramercy
Tavern and the Bronx. He paid the driver for his trouble, retrieved the
purse, and presented it to the woman just as she finished her lunch.
That night she renamed her beloved corgi "Carlo."

What makes this incident remarkable is not just that it happened at all,
but that similar actions routinely occur in each of Danny's restaurants.
Employees go above and beyond to create an unparalleled customer
experience. Danny sets himself apart from 20,000 other New York
restaurateurs with the way he uses *influence*. Danny's staff members
behave markedly differently from your average restaurant employee
because of Danny's systematic and intentional actions aimed at
influencing very specific behavior.

That's why we traveled to New York. We went to study true leadership.

### []{#ch1.xhtml#page_6 type="pagebreak"}LEADERSHIP IS INTENTIONAL INFLUENCE {.h3}

Now, let's be clear. This isn't a book about customer service. Likewise,
when we later visit a man in Salt Lake City who has helped thousands of
felons turn their lives around, we won't be studying criminal
psychology. And when we look at efforts aimed at eradicating diseases,
improving patient safety, reducing violence against women, or making
virtual workforces work, our interest won't be in exploring these topics
either.

What we *will* be doing is looking for the common thread that connects
all successful leaders---no matter the objective or the setting. We'll
explore a common set of principles and skills that can help you achieve
things that can only be accomplished by changing human behavior. We'll
be studying *influence.*

At the end of the day, *leadership is intentional influence.* If
behavior isn't changing, you aren't leading.

Despite what some have suggested in past decades, leadership isn't
simply about crafting inspiring visions or challenging the status quo.
Neither is it about coming up with a breakthrough product or
architecting detailed business growth plans. A solitary genius sitting
in a tower all alone can do those things.

Leadership is about mobilizing *others* to achieve the vision, challenge
the status quo, build breakthrough products, and execute flawlessly on
lofty plans. Leadership is the human process of cooperative achievement.
True leaders possess the repeatable capacity to influence rapid,
profound, and sustainable behavior change to produce valued results.

Now, as you hear the word *influence*, you might think that we're
referring to the less impressive and more suspicious tool called
*persuasion*. We're not. This book is not about solving problems or
hitting new targets by applying the right combination of verbal tricks.
If you're looking to reach rather modest goals by stealthily exerting
your will over others, this book is not for you. Likewise, the term
*influencer* these days has come to be more a measure of online
popularity than the []{#ch1.xhtml#page_7 type="pagebreak"}capacity to
lead meaningful change. You can't open a car door these days without the
risk of hitting a self-appointed "influencer." Some of these folks might
be good at getting attention, but a precious few have demonstrated the
capacity to systematically engage all the elements of influence required
to help people change deeply embedded behaviors to dramatically improve
their lives. As we'll see, *influence* is about far more than just being
an *influencer*. To that end, we've made the impor­tant decision to
change the title of the book in this third edition from *Influencer* to
*Crucial Influence.*

This book has much loftier and more enduring goals, requiring much
stronger tools. It explores how to achieve better results
everywhere---from a gold mine in Ghana to a family in Geneva to a
software team in Guangzhou---by changing entrenched human habits.

We'll examine in detail why people do what they do and what it takes to
help them act differently. Whether you're stopping AIDS or starting a
company safety program, the key to success has little to do with pep
talks, bribes, or your expert use of social media. Instead, success
relies on deploying a critical mass of the sources of influence that
shape all human behavior.

#### A Leader Who Influenced Change {.h4}

For example, after years of missed deadlines and buggy code from teams
that produce large, complex software systems, Rich Sheridan, CEO of
Menlo Innovations, began scrupulously studying the behaviors behind the
blunders. The search began with an epiphany: "I needed to think less
about the code and more about the humans that create the code."

Sheridan soon concluded that the key to consistent high-quality
performance was influencing his employees to practice two *vital
behaviors*: (1) admit when they have problems, and (2) speak up
immediately when they won't meet a deadline. He found that when
sprawling teams of software engineers did these two things consistently,
products got completed correctly and on time.

[]{#ch1.xhtml#page_8 type="pagebreak"}His next problem was figuring out
how to get dozens, and sometimes hundreds of people to do these two
things.

His challenge was that your typical human is more willing to donate a
kidney than to admit failure. No simple speech or manipulative technique
will overcome the overwhelming inducements toward silence that most
employees experience in the workplace.

By carefully working to influence these behaviors with the strategy
we'll share in this book, Sheridan was able to change his team's
behavior and overcome Menlo's quality control concerns.

#### Change Requires Influence {.h4}

Sheridan's record of accomplishment at Menlo Innovations is a testament
to true leadership. He and his team have developed a culture around
these two behaviors that results in unmatched on-time, on-budget,
on-spec performance. And they did so using precisely the same principles
of influence that Danny Meyer uses to inspire first-class hospitality.

Throughout this book, we'll explore influence strategies from leaders
like Rich and Danny who are successful because they understand that
*leadership is intentional influence*. They have systematic and
repeatable ways of thinking about why people do what they do and what it
takes to help them change. They think about influencing behavior, talk
about it, and practice it, and all of them have created remarkable
changes in domains where failure has been the norm---often for decades.

Now, you may not work in a software development firm or a restaurant,
but there's a good chance that human beings are involved with some of
the things that challenge you the most.

Perhaps you'd like to help a troubled son who has just returned from his
third drug rehab. You may be baffled about how to reduce turnover in
your call center, improve customer service in your government office, or
raise graduation rates in your high school. One of the best ways
[]{#ch1.xhtml#page_9 type="pagebreak"}to get better at addressing each
of these challenges is to get better at influence. Influence is the
common need embedded in almost everything we care about. If it involves
people, it's an influence problem.

::: {.sidebar}
*Wondering how you can make change happen? Read our study* How to 10X
Your Influence *and learn how the Crucial Influence model can increase
your odds of success tenfold. Read it at
[CrucialInfluence.com](http://CrucialInfluence.com).*
:::

### WHY WE LACK INFLUENCE {.h3}

Learning how to motivate and enable others to change their actions may
be the most important skill you'll ever acquire. Given the value of
knowing how to help other people act differently, you'd think that at
every backyard barbecue or office party you could find someone who is an
expert in influence. In fact, you'd think we'd be so consumed with the
topic of influence that our children would collect influence trading
cards, complete with pictures of world-class leaders. As a result of all
this study and passion, we would speak a unique language, carry a full
array of models, and master a specialized set of skills for both
enabling and encouraging others to change their behavior.

Of course, none of this is true. Most of us can't verbalize our personal
theory of influence or even recognize that as leaders we need one!
That's why few of us can remember the last time we saw a change attempt
conducted at our place of work yield anything more than the occasional
T-shirt or mug emblazoned with the name of the effort. And we're in good
company. Our review of the past 30 years of change literature reveals
that fewer than one in eight workplace change efforts produce anything
other than cynicism.

We're equally challenged at home. For instance, every year we spend
billions on diets and lose little more than our money. Fewer
[]{#ch1.xhtml#page_10 type="pagebreak"}than 10 percent of us succeed
when we set out to change our excessive spending, inadequate exercise,
and other unhelpful habits.

Communities fare no better. Two-thirds of the felons released from our
"correctional" system return within three years---completely
uncorrected---while having earned an advanced degree in crime. Stopping
the spread of pandemics requires people to change habits, yet millions
of individuals are infected every year because we humans are bad at
changing habits.

As a result of all of these failed influence efforts and unfulfilled
dreams, most of us grow impatient. We ask, "Why aren't people doing what
they should be doing, and why can't I get them to change?" Eventually,
we settle on the strategy recommended by essayist David Sedaris: "I
haven't got the slightest idea how to change people, but still I keep a
long list of prospective candidates just in case I should ever figure it
out."[^1^](#notes.xhtml#r_ch1notes1){#ch1.xhtml#ch1notes1}

But there *are* real leaders out there.

### FINDING INFLUENCERS {.h3}

To expand our understanding of influence and the central role influence
skills play in what matters most to us in life, we began a systematic
study of what works. This ongoing research took three forms: the
literature, the leaders, and the learners.

#### The Literature {.h4}

As most researchers do, we began by reading. Our research team pored
over more than 17,000 articles and books to find scholars and
practitioners who have mastered various aspects of influence. From
these, we identified those who had succeeded at influencing rapid,
profound, and sustainable changes in ways that most of the world thinks
are impossible.

#### []{#ch1.xhtml#page_11 type="pagebreak"}The Leaders {.h4}

Next, we tracked down these rare individuals and closely examined their
work. For instance, we traveled to Thailand to study the work of Wiwat
Rojanapithayakorn, who saved over 5 million Thai citizens from
contracting HIV/AIDS. While he had little to no organizational power as
he began his campaign, he found a way to influence the behavior of his
60 million fellow Thai citizens. Years after he finished this work, we
caught up again in Bangkok. Over dinner, about as casually as you'd
mention you had downloaded a new app, he reported that his government
asked him to help 9 million people stop smoking in the next five years.
And at the time of writing, he was on track to finish a couple of years
early. The most effective leaders don't stumble into success; they
develop repeatable ways of systematically influencing lasting change.

![Images](Grenny_0102.jpg)

Dr. Wiwat Rojanapithayakorn was director of Thailand's Center for the
Prevention and Control of AIDS.

Other remarkable leaders we'll talk about in this book who are effecting
change include:

•   []{#ch1.xhtml#page_12 type="pagebreak"}Martha Swai, an influencer in
Tanzania, who helped reduce spousal abuse across the entire nation
through the use of, of all things, a unique kind of radio program.

•   Dain Hancock, president of Lockheed Martin Aeronautics, who
influenced remarkable behavior change across a cynical and resistant
13,000-person workforce, helping him land a \$1 trillion contract.

•   Antanas Mockus, a math-professor-turned-mayor in Bogotá, Colombia,
who, during a terrible water shortage, reduced water use by 40 percent
among his constituents in a matter of months.

![Images](Grenny_0103.jpg)

In [Chapter 3](#ch3.xhtml#ch3) see how Martha Swai used a story to
change a nation.

We studied other notable leaders who helped longtime felons become
productive citizens, saved thousands from dying from hospital errors,
and lifted millions out of poverty---to name but a few of their
accomplishments. And it turned out every one of these leaders had done
it in precisely the same way. All used the same influence principles we
are about to share.

#### []{#ch1.xhtml#page_13 type="pagebreak"}The Learners {.h4}

It's one thing to *explain* success in retrospect. It's another to
repeatedly create it. Our confidence in the value of the leadership
skills you're about to study has increased over the decades since this
book was first published. We've watched thousands of parents,
supervisors, managers, and executives like you learn these skills and
put them into practice. A small sampling of the kind of rapid and
remarkable changes they've led include:

•   The owner of Gallery Furniture in Houston, Texas, dramatically
reduced damage happening during deliveries.

•   The CEO of telecom giant MTN increased innovation in a workforce
spanning Africa and the Middle East.

•   A senior manager at the biotechnology firm, Genentech, improved
decisions by involving more stakeholders without creating wasteful
delays.

•   A director at Intermountain Healthcare turned customer service
skills into consistent habits across a large hospital.

![Images](Grenny_0104.jpg)

In [Chapter 2](#ch2.xhtml#ch2), Laura Grams and Lisa Doyle at HCA
Healthcare discover the behaviors that are vital to retaining and
engaging nurses.

•   []{#ch1.xhtml#page_14 type="pagebreak"}VPs of HR and Learning at HCA
Healthcare influenced nursing retention during periods of high turnover.

•   An eBay executive fostered greater collaboration between siloed
teams.

•   A Willow Creek Food Pantry manager made it safer and less stressful
for patrons to use their services.

•   State Farm leaders dramatically increased cross-selling success.

•   Leaders at Fundación Paraguaya helped thousands in need increase
their household income.

•   A PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC) executive increased retention and
promotion of underrepresented groups in senior positions.

•   A group of Certified Financial Planners helped at-risk clients
change their spending habits during a major recession.

•   Newmont Mining site managers saved lives by increasing safety
compliance.

•   The Pakistani superintendent of police stemmed corruption and
reduced traffic fatalities by 60 percent.

•   MoneyGram HR managers influenced employees to resolve more problems
at the peer level before escalating them.

•   Pizza Hut managers improved team responses to crowded stores,
product failures, upset customers, and equipment problems.

•   Leaders at KIPP schools increased principal retention from 2.3 years
to 4.7 years.

We'll go into detail on some of these campaigns in the book, but we
claim no ownership of the ideas we will share. We hope we have added
value by organizing them in a portable and practical way for you. But
the wisdom they contain is the product of a century of research by a
legion of intrepid social scientists and evidence produced by countless
leaders.

[]{#ch1.xhtml#page_15 type="pagebreak"}Our goal is to help you see that
in almost every vital role you play, influence is an essential
competence. We are confident that the time you'll invest in studying
what comes next will be well rewarded as you learn to better understand
why those you care most about do what they do, and more importantly, how
to help them change.[]{#ch1.xhtml#page_16 type="pagebreak"}

[]{#ch2.xhtml}

[]{#ch2.xhtml#page_17 type="pagebreak"}2 {#ch2.xhtml#ch2 .h2n}
----------------------------------------

THE THREE KEYS TO INFLUENCE {.h2t}
---------------------------

*When you understand how the world works, you're in a better position to
change it.*

There are three things effective leaders do better than the rest of us.
All three show a more effective way of approaching influence. Our goal
in this book is to show you a better way of thinking about every
influence challenge in your life.

Before we get to the three keys, you need to know that everyone has a
theory of influence. Even if you don't think you do, you do! This theory
shows up every time you answer two questions:

**1.**   Why are they doing *that*?

**2.**   How can I help them do *this* instead?

You answer these questions all the time. Say you're driving on the
freeway and the person in front of you is going 15 mph (24 kph)
[]{#ch2.xhtml#page_18 type="pagebreak"}below the speed limit. You may
not realize it, but in the nanoseconds between tapping on your brakes
and muttering words of "encouragement" directed at the other driver, you
answered the question, "Why are they driving so slowly?" And the way you
answered that question drew from a theory you carry about why *everyone*
does what they do.

When your spouse is tardy to commitments, when a fast-food employee
forgets to put french fries in your bag, and when your boss fails to
support your promotion, you reflexively generate an answer to the "why"
question.

Your influence theory also determines how you'll try to get others to
change. We all have influence biases---tactics we default to when people
aren't behaving the way we want them to---whether it's reasoning,
bargaining, nagging, guilt-tripping, or sermonizing. Let's begin our
effort to improve the way we think about influence by sharing how the
remarkable leaders we've studied answer these two questions. In fact,
let's up the ante. Let's talk first not just about the handful of people
you'd like to influence, let's talk about the whole planet. In the next
few paragraphs, we'll offer a better way of thinking about *how the
world works* and *how to change the world.* Then we'll apply these
insights to the two questions above.

### HOW THE WORLD WORKS, AND HOW TO CHANGE IT {.h3}

Look at the following model. A helpful way to think about the way the
world works is to move from left to right along this model. On the left,
you see what looks like a six-pane window labeled "Six Sources of
Influence." We'll detail these later, but for now, we suggest that there
are six different kinds of influence that shape our choices.

Moving to the right, you see a hamster wheel labeled "Vital Behaviors."
The idea is that when the six sources of influence remain stable over
time, they help us make choices and shape our behaviors. These behaviors
produce "Results" (far right)---both good and bad.

[]{#ch2.xhtml#page_19 type="pagebreak"}![Images](Grenny_0201.jpg)

Crucial Influence® Model

For example, let's say you work in a hospital. For a variety of reasons
(six sources of influence), many of your doctors and nurses fail to
follow good hand-hygiene practices. If those reasons don't change, these
sloppy practices will harden into organizational norms (bad hygiene
habits). And those bad habits will create consequences (results), like
an increase in hospital-acquired infections. That's how the world works.

![Images](Grenny_0202.jpg)

Hospital Hand-Hygiene Example

Now that you understand how the world works, you're in a better position
to change it. The way you change the world using this model is from
*right to left*. That's right, the best leaders tackle influence
challenges in the opposite direction from how the world typically
operates. They use three skills that build on each other to move from
right to left:

**1.**   First, focus on *results*. Great leaders are better at
articulating what they want to achieve and how they will measure it.

**2.**   []{#ch2.xhtml#page_20 type="pagebreak"}Second, identify a small
handful of *vital behaviors*. These are the specific behavioral changes
needed to disproportionately improve results.

**3.**   Third, engage all *six sources of influence* to support your
vital behaviors.

![Images](Grenny_0203.jpg)

How to Change the World

In this chapter, we'll help you understand why these three disciplines
are crucial to effective influence. We'll elaborate on *results* and
*vital behaviors* and leave the rest of the book to help you think and
act more effectively by engaging all six sources of influence.

### KEY 1: FOCUS AND MEASURE {.h3}

To shine a light on this first influence key, we'll meet with Dr. Donald
Hopkins in Atlanta, Georgia. Dr. Hopkins is a physician and the former
vice president of healthcare programs at The Carter Center. He attracted
our attention by taking on one of the most daunting influence challenges
in history. His goal is to eradicate a horrendous global disease . . .
without finding a cure.

[]{#ch2.xhtml#page_21 type="pagebreak"}To remind himself of his goal,
Dr. Hopkins keeps a specimen of his foe on his desk in a jar of
formaldehyde. If his enemy could stand, she would be three feet tall.
But she has no skeletal system. She's a worm. More specifically, she's a
Guinea worm.

Helping individuals who have contracted Guinea worm disease is an
enormous challenge because once someone has it, it will inevitably run
its miserable course through the host's body. Medical science offers no
hope of relief. None. There are no medicines, surgeries, or magical
techniques. Once a person has the worm, it will cause havoc every single
time. Given that medical science had little to offer, Dr. Hopkins turned
to social science.

When Dr. Hopkins came on the scene, over 3 million people in 23,000
remote villages in 20 countries were contracting Guinea worm disease
every year. The disease begins when villagers get a little more in their
drink of water than they bargained for. Hiding within the fetid ponds
that many use as a water source lie the Guinea worm larvae.

When swallowed, the larvae hatch into worms inside the host's body, then
slowly burrow back out by whatever route they choose, through the muscle
and skin on an arm, a leg---well, you can imagine the other options.

This journey causes such enormous pain and suffering that the host
eventually rushes to the nearest water source and plunges the emerging
worm into the water to find a moment of relief. At this point, the worm
ejects thousands of eggs into the pond---guaranteeing next year's crop
of Guinea worms---when the awful process begins again as it has for
thousands of years.

Dr. Hopkins took an interest in the Guinea worm because he concluded
that it could literally be eradicated from the planet. All he had to do,
he told us matter-of-factly, was change the behavior of 120 million
people spread over 10 million square miles.

How would you approach this kind of problem? With a team of two dozen
people and a few million dollars in the budget, how could you even
*think* about getting millions of strangers to change?

[]{#ch2.xhtml#page_22 type="pagebreak"}Dr. Hopkins (like all the leaders
we studied) knows how to think about these kinds of problems and develop
repeatable and effective strategies to solve them.

The first thing effective leaders do is *focus and measure*. They
clearly articulate the goal they're trying to achieve. They know that
fuzzy objectives hinder influence and clear, consistent, and meaningful
measures are the foundation of influence.

Dr. Hopkins told us that job one was to create a reporting system in
affected countries to get accurate information about both the prevalence
of infection and the progress of the interventions they would attempt.
"Measurement isn't just about tracking results," he said. "It's also
about motivating action."

With a boyish grin he showed us one of his favorite progress reports. It
was a graphic of an oval racetrack with the faces of the heads of state
of various Guinea-worm-affected countries. He described a moment when he
met with one president who had lost focus on Guinea worm eradication
efforts. "I pulled out a stack of reports, but the only one he wanted to
see was the racetrack that showed him lagging far behind two neighboring
countries. Everything changed after that meeting."

Effective measurement drives attention, motivation, and learning. Less
effective leaders measure out of habit or compliance. The things they
measure are simply inherited norms or demands from outside stakeholders.
True leaders know that the only substantive reason to measure anything
is to drive behavior.

The way you know if you're measuring the right things in the right way
is by asking, "How does this measure influence behavior?"

Of the hundreds of influence attempts we've studied over the years, the
vast majority of them fail at the outset by neglecting this first key.
Unsuccessful leaders make one of two early mistakes that undermine their
influence: they fail to fully define desired results, or they don't take
the right kinds of measurements.

#### []{#ch2.xhtml#page_23 type="pagebreak"}Failing to Define Desired Results {.h4}

You'd think that if people got one only thing right when trying to
create a change, it would be defining their objective. Their objective,
after all, is the voice that calls out for change in the first place.
"We have really poor customer service." "Our inner-city kids need help."
"Our quality is mediocre, and we want to be the best."

The goals associated with each of these cries for change seem obvious.
Leaders need to improve customer service, help inner-city kids, and push
quality to new heights. Such goal statements sound good, but they are
too vague to exert any influence. "Improving customer service" could be
interpreted as everything from answering the phone by the second ring to
giving customers a free hamster with every purchase over \$50.

To see how top leaders set clear and measurable goals, consider the
near-legendary work of Dr. Don Berwick, the former CEO of the Institute
for Healthcare Improvement (IHI).

Despite IHI's diminutive size and Berwick's complete lack of position
power in the \$4 trillion US healthcare industry, he is universally
described as one of the most influential people in the field and a fine
example of making strong use of clear and compelling goals. In 2004, he
was tasked with reducing deaths due to medical errors.

"I think it's unacceptable," Berwick told us, "that the sixth leading
cause of death in the United States is healthcare. We inadvertently kill
the equivalent of a jumbo jet filled with passengers every day of the
year. We know how it happens, and we know how to avoid it. The challenge
is influencing people to stop it from happening."

In December of that year, Berwick stood in front of a group of thousands
of healthcare professionals and issued an audacious challenge by setting
a clear and compelling goal: "I think we should save 100,000 lives from
medical errors. I think we should do it by 18 months from today." Pause.
"By 9 a.m."

[]{#ch2.xhtml#page_24 type="pagebreak"}The success of the 100,000 Lives
Campaign is now in the record books.

How did Berwick and his team accomplish such a feat? He started with a
clearly defined goal. He and his team weren't just going to "try to
reduce medical errors." They weren't going to "improve safety." They
weren't going to save an impressive number of lives "as soon as they
could." They were going to save 100,000 lives from medical errors by 9
a.m. of June 14 of the next year.

There's no room for misinterpretation here. You're saving lives, not
simply changing numbers on a chart. And you know exactly how many and by
when. We'll learn a bit more later about how Berwick led the ultimate
success of this effort, but none of those subsequent tactics would have
influenced change without the foundation of this first key.

Clear goals aimed at a meaningful target can have an enormous impact on
behavior because they engage more than simply the brain. They also
engage the heart. Research reveals that a clear and challenging goal
causes the blood to pump more rapidly, the brain to fire, and the
muscles to engage. However, when goals are vague, no such effects take
place.[^1^](#notes.xhtml#r_ch2notes1){#ch2.xhtml#ch2notes1}

We saw firsthand what happens when a leader clearly defines the
objective. This time we visited with Martín Burt who started Fundación
Paraguaya more than 35 years ago. Initially, his goal was to provide
Paraguay's poor with access to credit as a means of helping them climb
out of poverty. Unfortunately, after spending 25 years trying to meet
that goal, Burt became concerned that many people were getting access to
credit, but too few were emerging from poverty.

As Burt and his leadership team reassessed their goal, they made a
stunning change. No longer would they focus on how many loans they
processed (a somewhat uncompelling goal). Instead, they announced the
following: beginning in April 2011, "Our goal is to help 5,000 poor
families to earn \$5 per day per person \[the national poverty line\] or
more before the end of the year."

[]{#ch2.xhtml#page_25 type="pagebreak"}![Images](Grenny_0204.jpg)

Leaders of Fundación Paraguaya pivoted an entire organization in record
time beginning with resetting the way they measured success.

The effect of providing this clear, compelling, and time-bound target
was immediate. It started a whole chain of events that virtually
reshaped the organization. It influenced the way people saw their jobs.
It influenced the skills loan officers would need to work with clients.
It influenced a million conversations that happened between Fundación
Paraguaya employees and their clients over the next eight months. And
best of all, it generated enormous pride when on December 31, 2011, Burt
announced that over *6,000* families had achieved this goal. And it all
started with a clear, compelling goal and a meaningful way to measure
it---the first key to influence.

Great leaders don't merely start their change efforts with their
ultimate results in mind. They take care to craft their goals into a
clear and compelling *results statement* that provides focus and
motivation to teams, organizations, and even whole countries to rally
around a compelling cause.

#### []{#ch2.xhtml#page_26 type="pagebreak"}Making Measurement Mistakes {.h4}

Change efforts are often undermined by three common measurement
mistakes. Either leaders take no measures, they measure something too
distant to be motivating, or their measures are too infrequent to
sustain attention.

##### Failure to Take Measures {.h5}

The most obvious and surprisingly common measurement mistake is not
measuring at all. People often leave out this step for several reasons:

•   They think they already have a firm grasp on the results they care
about. But their conclusions are based on anecdotal evidence and gut
impressions rather than reliable measures.

•   They're naive about influence. They don't understand what it takes
to engage human attention and motivation.

•   They're avoiding accountability---for example, business leaders who
shy away from setting aggressive growth targets that will be tracked
publicly, or drug rehab providers who protest legislation that would
require them to report long-term sobriety rates for those paying for
their pricey services.

•   It's just not a priority. Creating influential measures takes work.
We've heard countless arguments such as, "We're too busy and
resource-constrained to put effort into measurement."

At the end of the day, measurement is the truest test of our motives.
Why should anyone trust the sincerity of your commitment to your goal if
you aren't willing to put a stake in the ground and test whether you've
delighted customers, saved lives, or increased revenues? A lack of
measures can be evidence of a lack of real commitment.

##### Measuring Something Too Distant {.h5}

Let's return to the hospital where nurses and doctors are inadvertently
passing germs from patient to patient due to poor hand hygiene. The CEO
[]{#ch2.xhtml#page_27 type="pagebreak"}announces an inspiring *result*:
Within twelve months, we will achieve a sustainable record of zero
incidents of hospital-acquired infections.

This result is clear and motivating. But measuring infections alone
might not generate sufficient motivation for frontline workers who feel
too distant from the aspiration. You'll need to measure something close
enough to them that they feel useful in contributing to the result.

People who feel no control have no sense of connection. So it's crucial
to include a measure that will demonstrate meaningful progress toward
the goal for everyone involved. For example, you might develop a way of
tracking hand-hygiene compliance unit by unit within the hospital.

We once consulted with the US Army in their efforts to reduce sexual
assault within the military. When we started, their sole measure was
total reported assaults across the entire army. Few leaders up and down
the chain felt any accountability or connection to the numbers. An Army
captain with a company of a few dozen soldiers might have zero "reported
assaults" but still be failing to create the right climate to keep their
soldiers safe.

We urged Army leadership to create a closer, more controllable and
motivating measure. We suggested they find a variable that would be
highly predictive of reduced assaults, but within the control of
lower-level officers. Meaningful variables can include changes in
beliefs, attitudes, or behaviors that predict improvement in the results
you're after. We encouraged them to consider:

•   What beliefs, attitudes, or behaviors could you measure . . .

•   that are largely influenced by the immediate commander . . .
(closer)

•   and would dramatically predict or prevent the result you care about
(more motivating)?

After careful deliberation, they determined to hold every commander from
captain upward accountable for ensuring that everyone they lead can say
two things:

**1.**   []{#ch2.xhtml#page_28 type="pagebreak"}If I were sexually
assaulted or harassed, I would report it with full confidence it would
be properly investigated.

**2.**   If I were at risk of being assaulted or harassed, I have full
confidence my battle buddies would intervene to stop it.

Find a measure close enough to those you need to influence that they
feel able and motivated to do something about it.

##### Measurement Is Too Infrequent {.h5}

Finally, an influential measure must be taken frequently enough to
sustain attention. Imagine going to a sporting event where the score was
revealed only at the end. In all likelihood, not only would the fans
head for the exits, but the players would too. Measurement must both
sustain attention and inform action. In other words, it must keep the
mission front of mind while also providing feedback to your key players
about whether their influence strategy is working.

In a world awash with data, the measures that get attention are the ones
that are refreshed regularly. In a sense, they gamify the audacious
objective you're working to achieve. Successful games generate a
satisfying sense of mastery by offering the possibility of frequent
score increases.

A group of cardiac researchers once lamented to the legendary
psychologist Albert Bandura that too few patients consistently took
their heart medication. Bandura suggested they send patients home with
an inexpensive monitor with which they could test their blood pressure
twice a day. As patients saw progress corresponding to their medication
compliance, compliance soared. The measure both sustained the patients'
attention and provided feedback about their actions. You must do the
same.

This is why so few efforts to change organizational culture work.
Leaders often refuse to take "soft measures" more often than every year
or so. At the same time, managers get updates on budgets, sales, or
production []{#ch2.xhtml#page_29 type="pagebreak"}weekly or monthly. In
that world, guess how much leadership attention culture change gets?
Zippo. You'll get a week or two of self-flagellation when the annual
survey is updated, while managers wait confidently for the focus to
shift predictably to the higher-frequency metrics.

*A measure won't drive behavior if it doesn't maintain attention. And it
won't maintain attention if it's rarely assessed*---especially if other
measures are taken and discussed more frequently.

For example, what do you think would happen if our friend Danny Meyer
measured restaurant revenues daily but customer experience only
annually? Revenue would drive management attention, and customer
experience would get a ritualized yearly review---as is the case in most
of Danny's competitors.

Leaders often complain that it takes as much effort to measure an
influence campaign as it does to deploy the campaign itself. And within
this complaint lies the real problem. Leaders assume measurement is
separate from influence. It isn't. Measurement is influence.

The first step in any effective influence strategy is to articulate a
clear and compelling statement of the results you want and to develop a
close, controllable, and frequent method of measuring progress.

### KEY 2: FIND VITAL BEHAVIORS {.h3}

Every year more than 3,000 Americans drown, many of them in public
pools. This problem remained unchanged for decades until a team of
leaders from the YMCA and Redwoods Insurance got serious about
influence. It wasn't long before they had reduced the portion of these
3,000 deaths that happened at YMCA pools by two-thirds.

How did they do it? They studied tragedies and successes until they
found one vital (high-leverage) behavior that made the difference. They
discovered that traditional lifeguards were spending much of their time
greeting members, adjusting swim lanes, picking up kickboards,
[]{#ch2.xhtml#page_30 type="pagebreak"}and testing pool chemicals.
(Doesn't sound much like *lifeguarding*, does it?)

However, when lifeguards do *10-10 scanning*, drowning rates drop
immediately. Each lifeguard scans their section of the pool every 10
seconds, then offers assistance to anyone who *might* be in trouble
within 10 seconds. Simple. And it yields incredibly high leverage.

Redwoods Insurance worked with YMCAs across the world to help spare
hundreds of families from devastating loss of life by identifying and
implementing this one *vital behavior* that made all the difference.

If you're influencing others, their behavior should be changing. True
influence results in new behavior. It may seem strange that we need to
emphasize this, but the truth is many leaders turn leadership into a
mystical smoke about "changing hearts and minds."

Yes, to influence people's behavior, you'll need to influence the way
they feel and the way they think. But those are means to an end, not the
end itself. The end you're after is for some human being to vote, wash
their hands, smile sincerely at a customer, or speak up about safety
risks. You want new habits, not just new feelings.

Thus, the second key to influence is to clearly articulate the new
behaviors you believe will disproportionately affect the results you
want to achieve. We call these *vital behaviors*.

It turns out that even with very complex problems, often just one or two
behaviors produce the greatest amount of change. Take for example the
remarkable influence of The Other Side Academy in Salt Lake City, Utah,
USA.[^2^](#notes.xhtml#r_ch2notes2){#ch2.xhtml#ch2notes2}

Dave Durocher has one of the most unique employee populations in the
world. As executive director of The Other Side Academy, he leads some of
the most respected businesses in the region. In fact, in 2017, he and
his colleagues won the prestigious Ernst and Young Entrepreneur of the
Year award for their leadership of The Other Side Movers, the top-rated
moving company in the state for many years running.

[]{#ch2.xhtml#page_31 type="pagebreak"}![Images](Grenny_0205.jpg)

Leaders of The Other Side Academy have found two vital behaviors that
help those with deeply troubled lives achieve profound change.

The win was surprising because not only have Dave's 200 team members
been arrested an average of 25 times each, but Dave himself was
incarcerated for over 20 years prior to joining the Academy. It took a
swarm of police helicopters and SWAT specialists to capture him just
over a decade ago to face another 22 years in prison.

After lengthy pleading, a judge told him that if he stayed two full
years at a program called Delancey Street (a legendary program the
Academy is modeled after), he would be forgiven of his outstanding
sentence. In the end, he stayed eight years and became one of the most
impressive leaders we've ever met.

The Other Side Academy is a three-to-four-year, no-cost, self-supporting
academy for those with deeply broken lives. Its goal is to help students
achieve "whole-person change." Current students include a woman named
Tiffany who lived under a bridge for most of her younger years. Her
mother first introduced her to meth when she was 11 years old. She grew
up violent, addicted, and aimless.

[]{#ch2.xhtml#page_32 type="pagebreak"}After an arrest for an especially
heinous crime, Tiffany heard about The Other Side Academy. Her judge
agreed that if she could complete the rigorous life-skills experience at
the Academy she would be forgiven of her outstanding sentence.

Roughly 80 percent of students come to The Other Side Academy as an
alternative to additional incarceration. If the current student
population was not at the Academy, they would instead be collectively
serving over 1,000 years of prison or jail time. Tiffany's colleagues
include a man arrested for a string of interstate robberies, a gang
member facing multiple five-to-life sentences, and a generous number of
former drug dealers.

This might seem like a risky employee pool for a moving company. But
take a moment sometime to examine online reviews of The Other Side
Movers, and you'll think people are describing a visit to a high-end
spa. Hundreds of five-star reviews tout the kindness, integrity, speed,
and professionalism of students.

Although students at the Academy often hail from rival gangs, there has
never been an act of violence between students. While almost all of the
students were hardcore heroin, crack, or meth users the day before they
arrived, probation and parole officials who check students every month
have never reported a dirty drug test. And when city officials asked
neighbors if they were concerned about a large concentration of felons
moving into their neighborhood, all 55 of those who turned out to make
public comments rhapsodized about what wonderful citizens they are.

How does Durocher run world-class enterprises that generate the millions
needed to support the students year after year with a population most
would consider castoffs? A key to the success of The Other Side Academy
is a relentless focus on two vital behaviors.

Durocher says, "Our problem was never that we were drug addicts. Our
problem is that over time we became liars, thieves, cheats,
manipulators, and narcissists. We either never had---or lost---the
character []{#ch2.xhtml#page_33 type="pagebreak"}required to live a life
of integrity, accountability, and compassion. So that's what we focus on
here. We don't even talk about drugs. All we do is help students learn
to live a life around two habits: *200 Percent Accountability* and *Each
One Teach One*."

Street and prison life foster an attitude where you cover up for others'
crimes and never "rat" on anyone. At the Academy, 200 percent
accountability means that everyone is accountable not only for their own
behavior (the first 100 percent) but for the behavior of everyone else
in the house (the second 100 percent). The ethic is so rigorously
practiced that in recent years police departments have sent their
officers to learn peer accountability from these former
criminals.[^3^](#notes.xhtml#r_ch2notes3){#ch2.xhtml#ch2notes3}

"Each One Teach One" means that rather than living the self-centered
life of the past, you become responsible for the growth and success of
your peers. Once you learn something, you're responsible to teach it to
your brothers and sisters. The entire Academy is run by peers. There are
no "professional" outside staff members. Every aspect of the businesses
they run, including an award-winning boutique, storage business,
construction company, and moving company are run by older peers who
mentor younger peers in learning marketing, sales, operations,
logistics, and so on.

While the commercial success of the Academy businesses is impressive,
revenue is not their mission. The mission is deep and lasting change.
And evidence suggests that these habits contribute significantly to that
result. Before attending the Academy, students had a veritable 100
percent record of rearrest. By contrast, 92 percent of three-year
graduates of The Other Side Academy remain drug free, crime free, and
employed over the next three to five years.

A key to the success of The Other Side Academy, and all effective
influence efforts, is clarity about the vital behaviors they want to
foster. Even with very complex problems, the second key to influence is
to identify one or two vital behaviors that will have the greatest
impact on the results you're after.

[]{#ch2.xhtml#page_34 type="pagebreak"}So how do you find these
disproportionately effective habits if they're not glaringly evident?
The most efficient way is by studying something called "positive
deviance."

::: {.sidebar}
**Act Like an Influencer**

A bank executive bragged that she had identified the vital behavior for
winning a Dragon Boat race. Her bank sponsored a team that raced
outriggers across Tampa Bay. The vital behavior she had in mind?
Drumroll please: it's *paddling*. The executive laughed, but she was
also serious: "In the middle of a race, people start to argue about
strategies and tactics, and then somebody yells, 'Shut up and paddle!'
That's when you win the race!" Often it's the obvious but underused
habits that prove vital.
:::

#### Find Vital Behaviors by Studying Positive Deviance {.h4}

Sometimes the behavior you want to influence is obvious. You want
colleagues to show up better prepared for meetings, you hope patients
will take their medications properly after discharge from the hospital,
or you'd like theme park customers to throw their refuse in trash
receptacles. The behavior you need is obvious. But as we just saw at The
Other Side Academy, sometimes you know the *results* you're after but
aren't sure what *behaviors* will make the biggest difference. In those
cases, look for positive deviance.

Positive deviance occurs when an individual or group *should* have the
problem you're trying to solve but doesn't. In other words, they deviate
from the norm in a positive direction.

For example, the Covid-19 pandemic was tough on all industries,
*especially healthcare.* Like most hospital systems across the United
States, HCA Healthcare experienced high nursing turnover. Some hospitals
[]{#ch2.xhtml#page_35 type="pagebreak"}were losing 40 to 50 percent of
their most skilled nurses annually. Eye-popping contract labor offers,
often twice what the nurses were currently earning, led to bidding wars
that were unsustainable across the industry. Jennifer Berres, HCA
Healthcare's CHRO, suspected their problem was not just economics. She
suspected that there were opportunities to improve the situation by
influencing how leaders shaped and impacted the employee experience.

Berres asked two of her leaders, Lisa Doyle and Laura Grams, to start by
looking for positive deviance. They searched for hospitals within their
system, or units within hospitals, that were subject to the same market
conditions and competition for talent as others but were retaining
nurses at a higher rate. And they found some. They found hospitals and
units that had 60 to 70 percent lower turnover than their peers even
though they were of similar size and operated in equally competitive
labor markets.

Next, they looked at what those hospitals were doing differently and
uncovered vital behaviors---patterns of leadership behavior that were
starkly different in positive deviant hospitals compared to struggling
peers. Here's what they found.

The vital behaviors: leaders create regular experiences that help nurses
know:

**1.**   Leadership *cares* about them.

**2.**   *Help* is available when they need it.

**2.**   They have opportunities for professional *growth.*

As they focused their influence efforts on these behaviors, they saw
significant and rapid reductions in turnover in 26 out of 28 of their
highest priority facilities.

Dr. Donald Hopkins used the same method to find one vital behavior for
eradicating the dreaded Guinea worm. While most villages they studied
were rife with infections year after year, they would occasionally find
one that sometimes drew water from the same infected ponds
[]{#ch2.xhtml#page_36 type="pagebreak"}as a neighbor, but where Guinea
worm infections rarely occurred. Dr. Hopkins and his colleagues followed
villagers to the pond and soon understood why. Villagers from high
infection areas would bring a single gourd or bucket to the pond, fill
it with compromised water, then return to the village to use it.

Their positive deviant neighbors by contrast brought *two* gourds to the
pond. They immersed one in the pond, then covered the second with a
piece of cloth and poured the water into it. The first vital behavior
was discovered!

Effective leaders understand that influence is about changing behavior.
They set themselves up for success by clearly identifying the one or two
actions that, if practiced consistently, will create a cascade of
change.

::: {.sidebar}
*See how one school system found the vital behaviors to overcome
leadership turnover. Read the KIPP case study at
[CrucialInfluence.com](http://CrucialInfluence.com).*
:::

### KEY 3: ENGAGE ALL SIX SOURCES OF INFLUENCE {.h3}

The third and final key to influence lies in finding a way to get people
to adopt new vital behaviors. You've identified what you want. You know
what behaviors it will take to get you there. Now you have to get people
to actually do them. But how?

As we said earlier, everyone has a theory of influence. Every idea you
come up with for influencing others is shaped by that theory. The
problem is that most of our theories revolve around one source of
influence. Usually, we resort to some sort of incentive or punishment.
In reality, though, there are a variety of sources of influence that
affect people's motivation as well as their ability to adopt the vital
behaviors.

We've created a model of the six different sources, or categories, of
influence that determine human behavior. If you want to amplify your
[]{#ch2.xhtml#page_37 type="pagebreak"}influence, you need to learn to
think categorically. Every time you think of a way of influencing
others, ask yourself, "Which source of influence does this idea employ?"
This practice is a helpful nudge to ensure you explore all possible
sources of influence.

The reason this discipline is so vital is that effective leaders
overdetermine success. In other words, great leaders put all six sources
of influence to work to make change inevitable.

::: {.sidebar}
*Effective leaders succeed where the rest of us fail because they
overdetermine success.*
:::

Less effective leaders do the opposite: they *under*determine change.
They come up with one idea---focusing on one source of influence---and
put it into practice. When they fail to see substantive change, they
either give up or try another source of influence. That's the equivalent
of asking six strong people to help you push a stalled vehicle, one at a
time.

If it's true that six sources of influence shape our choices, and all
you change is one of them, that means the other five are still
supporting the old norms. Our research shows that leaders who learn the
discipline of recognizing and engaging all six sources of influence are
not just *incrementally* more effective, they are *exponentially* so.
The odds of you seeing rapid, profound, and sustainable behavior change
go up 1,000 percent when you overdetermine
change.[^4^](#notes.xhtml#r_ch2notes4){#ch2.xhtml#ch2notes4}

Let's take a quick look at these six sources. We'll then spend the rest
of the book examining them in detail and learning how to apply them to
solve your own influence challenges.

#### Source 1. Personal Motivation {.h4}

We'll start with the source people most frequently include in their
leadership attempts: personal motivation. As you watch others not doing
the right thing while repeatedly doing the wrong thing, ask: *Do they
[]{#ch2.xhtml#page_38 type="pagebreak"}get pleasure or a sense of
meaning from doing the wrong thing?* In most cases---particularly with
deep-rooted behavior---this source of influence is an important factor
in propelling and sustaining change.

Let's return to Dr. Donald Hopkins and the race to eradicate Guinea worm
disease. Once his team determined a vital behavior that would prevent
the spread (filtering water before consuming it), they needed to
influence people to actually do the behavior required. They used all six
sources of influence to achieve that.

For example, Dr. Hopkins knows villagers won't filter their water unless
they *feel* a sense of purpose for doing so (e.g., *I want to protect my
children from miserable infections!*). So, as we'll see later, Dr.
Hopkins develops influence methods to frame water filtering as a way of
protecting children for those he tries to influence.

#### Source 2. Personal Ability {.h4}

Of course, motivation isn't everything. When trying to understand why
others don't do what they should do, ask: *Can they do it?* Just because
individuals enjoy doing something doesn't mean they'll succeed. They
need to have the skills, talent, and understanding required to enact
each vital behavior or they'll fail.

For example, it's easier to get water filtering wrong than right. If you
use a loosely woven cloth, or if you filter one gourd on one side of the
cloth, then turn it the other way on the next gourd, or if you fail to
completely cover the opening of your vessel, larvae may sneak through.
Skill matters. Engaging villagers in hands-on practice supervised by
competent peers made a big difference in eradicating Guinea worm.

#### Source 3. Social Motivation {.h4}

Next, you need to examine the social side of influence by asking: *Do
others encourage them to enact the wrong behavior?*

Despite the tremendous potential benefit of filtering water in villages,
few pick up the new habit until those they respect do it first. No
[]{#ch2.xhtml#page_39 type="pagebreak"}one wants to look like a misfit.
Dr. Hopkins was careful to consider not just the message but the
messengers he used to encourage the new behaviors. He chose formal
leaders and influential community members to help carry his message.

#### Source 4. Social Ability {.h4}

Others not only provide a source of motivation, but they can also enable
vital behaviors. To examine this important source of influence, ask: *Do
others assist them? Are they enabled to do it?* Villagers were much more
likely to pick up the filtering habit when Dr. Hopkins arranged for
friends to model it, provide feedback, and even loan a spare filtering
cloth when needed.

#### Source 5. Structural Motivation {.h4}

Even leaders who think about both individual and social factors are
often blind to the role "things" play in encouraging and enabling vital
behaviors. To check for this source, ask: *Are they rewarded for doing
it, or punished for not doing it?*

Dr. Hopkins often used token rewards for doing the new behavior to
jumpstart change---a T-shirt here and a bag of rice there can help
people attempt an uncomfortable new habit.

#### Source 6. Structural Ability {.h4}

Finally, the physical and virtual environments we're in, and the
structure of our work and social systems, can either encourage or
discourage performance. To examine this source, ask: *Does their
environment enable them?*

For example, Dr. Hopkins and his team encouraged village leaders to
fence off access to ponds except at certain access points. That made it
easier to have experts observe water-gathering to ensure everyone was
practicing good filtering habits.

[]{#ch2.xhtml#page_40 type="pagebreak"}So, there they are---the three
keys to influence. Whether you're eradicating disease or improving
customer service, these three principles provide the foundation of all
effective influence strategies. They aren't tricks or gimmicks. They
aren't fads or the "latest things." They aren't quick fixes. But
together they make up a *learnable* path to success. They are the
science of leading change.

[]{#part2.xhtml}

[]{#part2.xhtml#page_41 type="pagebreak"}PART II {#part2.xhtml#part2 .h2pn}
------------------------------------------------

THE SIX SOURCES OF INFLUENCE {.h2pt}
----------------------------

![Images](common.jpg)

[]{#part2.xhtml#page_42 type="pagebreak"}Most of us have an influence
bias---and don't even realize it. We have a favorite source of influence
we reflexively lean on when trying to help others change. One of the
fastest ways to amplify your influence is to learn to spot your bias,
then broaden your options.

For example, imagine you're a healthcare CEO. You have a fancy new
artificial intelligence system to help doctors better diagnose and treat
patients. The problem is since you announced the mandatory use of the
new system, a grand total of 12 percent of your doctors have begun using
it. Some have become openly hostile. You've been accused of everything
from "replacing medicine with a cookbook" to "dehumanizing healthcare."
What will you do?

Now be careful. The way you answer that question gives a hint about your
influence bias. Will you invoke consequences? Make a moral argument?
Invest in more training? Or perhaps offer incentives? Each of these
options represents a different category of influence. Most of us have
favorite categories. And the problem with favorites is that they
undermine our influence. They tempt us to demand that people respond to
the single source of influence we wield rather than the many that shape
them.

But people bet on single-source influence strategies all the time. Ask
leaders how they're planning to change their employees from being
clock-punchers to customer zealots, and they'll point to their new
training program---the same one that made Disney a master of the
customer experience. The training content might provide a start, but
when it comes to creating a culture of service, it'll take a great deal
more than a course. Ask politicians what they're doing to reduce
homelessness, and they'll tell you that they're building thousands of
deeply affordable tiny homes. Their hope is that housing availability (a
single source of influence) will solve homelessness. But housing alone
is unlikely to have much of an impact if many other sources of influence
are at play with the unsheltered people they're trying to help.

All of us have yearned for a quick fix for a complex problem. A powerful
phrase for holding people accountable, a magical marriage solution, a
two-hour course that will change your work culture from a short- to a
long-term orientation.

[]{#part2.xhtml#page_43 type="pagebreak"}But as H. L. Mencken said,
"there is always a well-known solution to every human problem---neat,
plausible, and
wrong."[^1^](#notes.xhtml#r_part2notes1){#part2.xhtml#part2notes1}

If the behavior you're trying to change is supported only by one source
of influence, changing that one might be sufficient to improve results.
However, when you're facing long-standing, highly established habits,
you're typically up against many---if not all six---sources of
influence. If six sources are driving a bad habit and you address only
one, what do you predict will happen?

If you answered, "Nothing," you're right. The problem is not a mystery.
It's math.

For the rest of this book, we're going to learn about the Six Sources of
Influence in depth. To understand how the sources are related, you need
to first know why we've organized them the way we have.

### MOTIVATION AND ABILITY {.h3}

Virtually all forces that influence human behavior work on one of two
drivers. At the end of the day a person asks, "Can I do it?" and, "Will
it be worth it?"

The first question simply asks, "Am I able?" The second, "Am I
motivated?" *Motivation* and *ability* make up the two columns of our
six-source model. Our research shows most leaders tend to live on the
left side of the model and rarely look at the right. They tend to
overestimate the amount of motivation required to influence change, and
grossly underestimate the degree to which *ability* plays a role.

For example, a friend asks you for advice to change his eating habits.
"My doctor tells me to try to eat about 2,000 calories a day," he
laments. "Yesterday I ate 5,286 calories. I finished the day by downing
an entire tub of Ben and Jerry's ice cream in my hotel room. Why do I
keep doing this?"

How would you answer your friend's question? Why is he continually
overshooting his caloric intention by such a colossal amount?

Typical answers include, "Ben and Jerry's is yummy," or, "You were
stressed," or, "You lack self-control," or a fan favorite: "You eat your
feelings." []{#part2.xhtml#page_44 type="pagebreak"}Whatever your
answer, ask yourself, did you assume it was a motivation problem or an
ability problem?

If you're like most people, you defaulted to motivation.

How you answer the "Why are they doing this?" question will drive how
you attempt to influence change. If your answer is a simple "try
harder," your theory of influence probably looks like the following
figure.

![Images](Grenny_Part_0201a.jpg)

Personal Motivation

We've put the question of "why do people do what they do?" to tens of
thousands of leaders across the world. Less than 1 percent of the time
does someone respond with, "Perhaps they lack some skills."

One of the most powerful uses of the Six Sources of Influence is to
develop the habit of examining the world through each of the sources as
you diagnose the behavior you'd like to change.

Every time you consider the causes of someone's behavior, look at both
sides of the model and ask, "How does motivation play a role?" then "How
about ability?" This discipline will increase your influence
exponentially.

### PERSONAL, SOCIAL, AND STRUCTURAL INFLUENCES {.h3}

Behavior is driven by motivation and ability, and those drivers can both
be broken down into three helpful subcategories: personal, social, and
structural.

[]{#part2.xhtml#page_45 type="pagebreak"}![Images](Grenny_Part_0201.jpg)

Six Sources of Influence with Diagnostic Questions

The top row, "Personal" looks *inside* the person to understand what
motivates and enables them to act the way they do. The second row,
"Social," looks at all the people around them to examine how others
influence their motivation and ability. And finally, the third row,
"Structural," looks at how nonhuman influences (like economics, physical
space, policies, and processes) motivate and enable behavior.

Let's look at an example about what happens when you consider each
source as you diagnose the root of behavior you'd like to change.

One of the authors got a call one night at 9:30 p.m. He wasn't surprised
to get a call. But he was surprised that it was the police. The officer
said sternly, "We have your 13-year-old son, Brian, here at the station.
He and his friends were throwing water balloons at cars."

As Dad drove through the dark, he fumed about his miscreant son. His
*theory of influence* was simple: Brian did this because he is an
impulsive []{#part2.xhtml#page_46 type="pagebreak"}teenager who has no
respect for others. It was purely a problem of bad motives, and Dad had
just the solution: ask the police to incarcerate him until he was 18.

Fortunately, it was a somewhat lengthy drive to the police station. As
Dad had time to breathe, he began to examine the problem more carefully.
Look how much richer his diagnosis was when he considered each source of
influence:

![Images](Grenny_Part_0202.jpg)

Six Sources of Influence Applied to Throwing Water Balloons

By the time Dad pulled into the precinct, he was in a different
emotional place. As he walked through the station door, he could not
only see how *understandable* the bad decision was, but also had more
inspired ideas about how to influence change. More on what he did later.

[]{#part2.xhtml#page_47 type="pagebreak"}How you explain someone's
behavior determines how you feel about their behavior. When your
diagnosis is more complete, your feelings become more nuanced.

Our goal in the coming chapters is to persuade you of three things:

**1.**   **The power of the Six Sources of Influence.** As you come to
appreciate the potency of each source of influence, you'll become
convinced of the dangers of neglecting any of them.

**2.**   **The possibilities for engaging every source.** As we describe
how leaders across the world use each source of influence, we hope you
see how dynamic they are.

**3.**   **The hope for real change when you engage all six sources.**
The cumulative message is that it is possible to think in more
intentional ways about the most important work we ever do: influencing
human behavior.

::: {.sidebar}
***Do you currently face a change challenge?** Take our Crucial
Influence assessment to see how well you apply multiple sources of
influence---and how you can improve. Take the assessment at
[www.CrucialInfluence.com](http://www.CrucialInfluence.com).*
:::

### À LA CARTE IS OK TOO {.h3}

Don't feel guilty if you get a single great idea from a chapter and
decide to use it without addressing all six sources of influence. Much
of the time you're just trying to persuade someone to attend a meeting,
and you don't need to pull out the six-source model and conduct a full
diagnosis.

For these simpler influence challenges, feel free to use ideas "à la
carte" and see how they work. You don't always have to use all six
sources of influence to create change. However, when simpler efforts
fail, use the full model to diagnose the reason and to figure out how to
supplement your effort to achieve greater success.

[]{#ch3a.xhtml}

[]{#ch3a.xhtml#page_48 type="pagebreak"}![Images](Grenny_0301.jpg)

[]{#ch3.xhtml}

[]{#ch3.xhtml#page_49 type="pagebreak"}3 {#ch3.xhtml#ch3 .h2n}
----------------------------------------

HELP THEM LOVE WHAT THEY HATE {.h2ta}
-----------------------------

*Source 1: Personal Motivation*

*It's possible to change how people feel about almost any behavior. Good
leaders help people love what they might otherwise hate, using four
powerful reframing tactics.*

We'll start our exploration of the Six Sources of Influence by examining
tactics that address source 1, *personal motivation*. This important
source of influence answers the question: Is the vital behavior
intrinsically pleasurable or meaningful? Or is it painful?

The first problem leaders face is that good behaviors often feel bad
while bad behaviors feel good. For example, to eradicate the dreaded
Guinea worm disease we mentioned earlier, leaders have to get 3 million
people who are suffering the terrible agony associated
[]{#ch3.xhtml#page_50 type="pagebreak"}with an emerging worm to avoid
doing the one thing that would bring them immediate relief---soaking
their infected limbs in the water. How could you possibly hope to
convince others to do something so painful and difficult?

But it's not just Guinea worm disease eradication that demands that
people find a way to do what they don't like doing. Think about it. The
vast majority of the intractable influence problems we face or the
stretch goals we routinely miss are made more daunting because bad
things are fun and good things aren't.

For example, tens of thousands of people die in hospitals each year
because healthcare workers don't always wash their hands properly. Why?
In part because it's tedious. But it can also even be painful to do it
for the eighty-seventh time in a day. Likewise, Danny Meyer, the New
York restaurateur, has to find a way to help thousands of employees take
pleasure in going to extraordinary lengths to serve clients who are
sometimes unruly or even petulant.

Can you help others *want* to do something that they currently *don't
want* to do? Is it possible to help others learn to love what they
presently hate?

### TUESDAY AFTERNOON AT THE OTHER SIDE ACADEMY {.h3}

It's 3:17 on a Tuesday afternoon. Jessica is carrying food plates to a
couple of fellow students who are not feeling
well.^[\*](#ch3.xhtml#ch3fn1){#ch3.xhtml#r_ch3fn1}^ Usually, Jessica is
responsible for finances, but the culinary services crew boss was
short-staffed and asked her to help out. So she arranged coverage of her
desk, and here she was carefully carrying plates to the ailing students'
dorm.

[]{#ch3.xhtml#page_51 type="pagebreak"}What surprises Jessica is how
quickly her feet are moving. She can't recall the last time they moved
this fast. From the time she was nine, she had perfected a purposefully
casual gait. She took great pride in her "I'm OK/you suck" approach to
life. No matter that this attitude had landed her in jail for most of
her adolescent years. No matter that it had earned her a manslaughter
conviction after someone looked at her sideways in a bar. Nobody was
going to tell her what to do. Nobody.

So why is Jessica walking so fast now? It's been 19 months since she was
offered a place at The Other Side Academy rather than ser­ving her third
prison term. Every semester, Jessica has attended the Academy's
graduation ceremony. It's a grand gathering where all the students crowd
into the main hall to celebrate each other's progress. The first two
times Jessica was recognized for her accomplishments, she stared at the
floor and ignored whatever they were saying about her, thinking, *Who
cares that I now know how to set a stupid table? This is all a pointless
game, and I'm not playing it!* When the applause for Jessica had died
down, she walked back to her chair, unaffected.

But at last week's graduation ceremony they had talked about her GED
diploma and her promotion to crew boss. She had looked at Dave Durocher,
who was remarking on how far Jessica had come, and made the mistake of
listening to what he said---just for a second. Then came the wave of
applause. Jessica looked around the room and caught the eyes of a few of
her sisters and brothers. Then she looked quickly back down at the
floor. Her legs felt weak when she walked back to her chair. "I'm not
sure what that is," she mumbled to herself. "I'm probably just hungry."
She ate a candy bar.

Now as Jessica rushes to the dorm, she looks down again, only this time
at her legs. They're moving so fast it's as if they have a mind of their
own. And then she lifts her hand to her cheek and feels something wet.
*I don't do this. What the hell is this?* Jessica is crying.

### []{#ch3.xhtml#page_52 type="pagebreak"}MAKE PAIN PLEASURABLE {.h3}

So, what has happened to Jessica at this tender moment of an ongoing
transformation? In Jessica's words, she realized in that instant that
she was feeling emotions she had never felt before. She was taking
pleasure in accomplishing something. She was finding joy in her work.
Better still, she has learned to care about something. In Jessica's own
words, "After thinking about it all afternoon, I finally realized I was
crying because *I cared*. I cared that I got the food to my family. I
cared *a lot*."

If Jessica has found a way to take pleasure from something that she
previously disliked, what might your average person learn from this? For
example, what mysterious trick might you pull in order to help your son
enjoy doing his chores? Could this same magic potion help a team *enjoy*
the work involved in reducing errors to below 3.4 per million? And can
you use Jessica's mystical elixir to make eating mini carrots as
enjoyable as wolfing down a slice of chocolate cream pie?

People learn ways to take pleasure from almost any activity, even if the
activity isn't inherently satisfying.

Social psychologist Jonathan Haidt makes this point rather bluntly:
"Just because a desire or behavior is natural, does not mean it is . . .
unchangeable. . . . It is also natural . . . to never brush our teeth.
Yet we teach ourselves to do the unnatural. Another characteristic of
human nature---perhaps the one that makes us more human---is our
capacity to do the unnatural, to transcend and hence transform our own
nature."[^1^](#notes.xhtml#r_ch3notes1){#ch3.xhtml#ch3notes1}

We're extending this argument even further. Humans don't merely find
ways to act unnaturally. They find ways to enjoy activities that aren't
inherently enjoyable. Depending on your point of view, handwashing in a
hospital can feel like either a tedious distraction or a sacred duty.
Finishing tasks on time can feel like either a bureaucratic bore or a
demonstration of integrity. Changing a baby's diaper can feel like
either a gruesome chore or a precious moment. The question is, how can
you help vital behaviors feel like the latter rather than the former?

#### []{#ch3.xhtml#page_53 type="pagebreak"}Change the Frame and You Change the Feeling {.h4}

The good news is it's possible to change how people feel about almost
any behavior. For example, chocolate is not inescapably tempting, and
doing push-ups is not unavoidably miserable. Believe it or not, some
people deeply enjoy playing repetitive games with grandchildren, running
until their legs give out, mowing the lawn, or proofreading technical
manuals. Why? It isn't because the nature of the activity is different
for them. It's because they experience the activity differently than
others. They feel different because they frame the behavior differently.

Your moral frame for an activity is your answer to the question, "What
does this mean?"

For example, come with us to a popular burger joint in a busy part of
town. Imagine you are the manager of this busy burger joint. You have an
employee named Lou who just isn't into the whole customer-serving thing.
You've been reminding him, coaching him, and even pleading with him to
greet customers, thoroughly clean tables, and in other ways improve the
guest experience.

Today you look over the patio eating area where you see five filthy
tables, and then your eyes land on Lou, who is sitting at a table,
stuffing his face with french fries, and sending a text message. What
will you do? Think about it. If you had to craft one sentence to
influence Lou, what would it be?

Now, examine your sentence. What method of influence did you employ? If
you're like most of us, your sentence was some form of nag, guilt, or
threat. Generally, when we face a problem like Lou, we make an automatic
assumption that he's simply not motivated because he takes no pleasure
in doing the work. Then, without even realizing it, we make a second
mental leap. We assume that the reason he's not motivated is because of
some moral defect.

That may sound harsh, but think about it for a moment. When a doctor
fails to wash her hands, we might assume, "She cares more
[]{#ch3.xhtml#page_54 type="pagebreak"}about her own convenience than
about patient safety!" Similarly, when Lou fails to exert himself for
customers, we conclude, "He's just lazy."

This tendency to attribute others' worst behavior to some underlying
character flaw is so common that psychologists have given it a special
name: the *fundamental attribution error*.

#### Avoid the Fundamental Attribution Error {.h4}

The fundamental attribution error is the belief that people do what they
do merely because they enjoy it: "Why did that bozo just cut me off in
traffic? Because he's selfish and thinks the road belongs to him."
Whenever others cause us inconvenience or pain, we have a natural
tendency to suspect that they have selfish and malicious intentions.

The best leaders *don't* assume that others take the low road because of
a moral defect. They consider that the behavior might be caused by a
lack of understanding or a lack of awareness of consequences. The
problem is not that these people are incapable of caring about others.
It's that they aren't *thinking* about others at that particular moment.

In other words, doctors who fail to wash their hands between patients
may not be uncaring. It could be that in the moment they're not thinking
about germs and infections. They're thinking about examining the next
patient or perhaps even comforting a patient's family member.

So if the problem with Lou is not a moral defect, but moral slumber,
what can you do to wake him up? How can you infuse a crucial
moment---one in which he can act in a way to better serve customers
(rather than just doing grunt work)---with moral significance? Stay
tuned. We'll return to Lou (and misbehaving teenager Brian) later to see
how this crucial moment can be turned into a moment of influence.

### []{#ch3.xhtml#page_55 type="pagebreak"}HELP OTHERS REFRAME THE BEHAVIOR {.h3}

Good leaders understand how easy and important it is to influence the
way people frame vital behaviors. They help people love what they might
otherwise hate using four powerful reframing tactics:

**1.**   Allow for choice.

**2.**   Create direct experiences.

**3.**   Tell meaningful stories.

**4.**   Make it a game.

#### Tactic 1. Allow for Choice {.h4}

*Allow for choice* is at the top of our list of strategies because it's
the gateway to all other methods of influencing personal motivation. As
organizational scholar Peter Block put it, "If we cannot say no, then
saying yes has no meaning."

You can never hope to get people's commitment if they don't have
permission to say no. So long as people frame the vital behavior as a
"have to" rather than a "want to," they will feel resistant rather than
committed.

When others appear to be willfully misbehaving, our natural reaction is
to nag, guilt, or threaten them.

"Lou! Get back to work!"

We've all done it. Perhaps you have a grown child who comes to family
events late. Every single time. And when she walks in the door late, you
say, "It's about time you got here!" Every single time.

We want to influence others, but we tend to do it in a way that provokes
resistance rather than inviting willingness.

Top leaders approach resistance with an influence mindset. Their first
goal is to ensure that the vital behavior is framed in a personally
motivating way.

There is no better evidence of the efficacy of this approach than the
work of University of New Mexico psychologist Dr. William Miller.

##### []{#ch3.xhtml#page_56 type="pagebreak"}Use the Influence of Questions {.h5}

Miller has spent his long career studying how to influence
addicts---those caught in self-destructive habits that offer some form
of immediate gratification. Addiction is the ultimate example of bad
stuff feeling good and good stuff feeling bad.

What can you possibly do to influence someone whose world seems arranged
in that way? Most people with addictions have been lectured, threatened,
and guilt-tripped by well-intended friends and family for years. They've
often been written off by those who think they've tried everything, and
conclude that their addicted friend simply doesn't want to change. So
what has Miller learned about motivating those who appear unmotivated to
change?

He learned that *we often mistake ambivalence for apathy*. Most addicts
sincerely possess both motivations to quit and motivations to use. And
most of the change tactics we try (nagging, lecturing, etc.) keep them
focused on their reasons to use.

Dr. Miller's influence prescription to change the cycle is what he calls
a *motivational interview*.

![Images](Grenny_0305.jpg)

William Miller discovered how leaders can be more effective at helping
people choose to change.

[]{#ch3.xhtml#page_57 type="pagebreak"}On the way to his discovery, Dr.
Miller studied the consequences of the made-for-TV "intervention"
approach. The reigning theory at the time was that a well-staged
confrontation between unified loved ones and the addict would compel
them to confront their demons. It didn't. In fact, in one study, he
found that confrontation actually *increased* alcoholic binging.

Demanding that people change rarely leads to change. So Miller began to
explore alternate approaches. Decades later, his findings have become
the gold standard for influencing those struggling with drug addictions,
alcohol abuse, eating disorders, gambling, high-risk sex, and dozens of
other overpowering habits.

A motivational interview replaces judgment with empathy, and lectures
with questions. The goal is to help people connect and commit to
motivations already at play to kick their habit.

This tactic is often used at The Other Side Academy. For example, Raoul,
who has been at the Academy for three days, tells his tribe leader,
Diego, that he is leaving. "I can't do this," Raoul says. "I just want
to go get high." Diego's natural impulse might be to issue a threat:
"The minute you walk out I'm calling Adult Probation and Parole and
you'll do your 10-year prison term." He could also try shame: "So you
want to be the same loser you were when you walked in?"

Both of these approaches assume Raoul is apathetic. But Diego knows
better. He knows there is motivation to change inside of Raoul---Diego's
job is to simply help him find it.

**Diego:** *"I know you want to get high. I've been there, bro. Is that
all you want?"*

**Raoul:** *"No, man. I thought I could do this. I just can't."*

**Diego:** *"Yeah, the first days are pretty tough. So it sounds like
you wish you could do this. Yeah?"*

[]{#ch3.xhtml#page_58 type="pagebreak"}**Raoul:** *"Of course. That's
why I walked in. But I'm not ready."*

**Diego:** *"Why did you come here? Remind me."*

**Raoul:** *"Because I don't want my kids to have a loser dad like I
did."*

**Diego:** *"How bad did you want that when you walked in? Scale of 1 to
10?"*

**Raoul:** *"A 10, man. A total 10."*

At this point, Raoul hangs his head and begins to cry. This man is not
apathetic. He's ambivalent. He has a mixture of reasons to change and
reasons to quit. By replacing a lecture with an interview, Diego has
started to help him reconnect with motivations he already has. He has
started Raoul on a path to choosing to stay.

In a motivational interview, a friend or counselor helps others reach
their own conclusions about the values that are most important to them
and the changes living those values might require. When you ask
thought-provoking questions and then listen while others talk, they
discover on their own what they must do. Then, propelled by their own
aspirations and beliefs, they *choose* to make the necessary changes.

Smart leaders do the same. When facing potential resistance, they
explore and connect with motivations people already have that can help
them choose to change.

Let's look at a business example of motivational interviewing in action.

Ralph Heath, now president of Lockheed Martin Aeronautics, was once
tasked by the company to move the fifth-generation F-22 fighter jet from
drawing board to production floor in 18 months. To do so, he had to
engage 4,500 engineers and technicians and change their view of what it
took to invent things. Heath had to convince them that
[]{#ch3.xhtml#page_59 type="pagebreak"}results mattered more than ideas
(a tough sell with engineers) and that engineering needed to bow to
production (an even tougher sell).

So Heath didn't sell; he listened. He spent weeks interviewing employees
at all levels. He tried to understand their needs, frustrations, and
aspirations. When he finally began sharing directives, he framed them in
ways that honored the needs, concerns, and goals of those he had
interviewed.

His influence didn't result from merely confronting problems but from
listening to people and then framing needed behavior change in *their
terms*. The now legendary turnaround of the F-22 began when Heath helped
people discover what they really wanted and how it related to corporate
objectives---rather than simply issuing orders.

##### Change the Frame {.h5}

A change of heart can't be imposed; it can only be chosen. People are
capable of making enormous sacrifices when they have the choice to act
on their own. An influential leader's job is to help them find their own
reason to choose the vital behavior.

Ginger Graham, the CEO of the medical devices company Guidant, learned
this in a crisis. After the company introduced a new cardiovascular
stent, sales went through the roof. Almost overnight, good news turned
into bad news as demand for the stent far outstretched supply. And all
this hit as the holidays were approaching.

Meeting demand until new sources of production could come online would
require three-shift workdays and seven-day workweeks. Graham could have
simply mandated the work and required people to fulfill their
obligations, but she knew that wouldn't work. It would be unfair to
force this family-unfriendly schedule on employees when they deserved
time off. And doing so would likely provoke resentment and hurt
productivity.

So instead, Graham asked for help. At an all-company meeting, she
praised the work that had brought about the wonderful achievement.
[]{#ch3.xhtml#page_60 type="pagebreak"}She read success stories from
doctors who were using the stent to avoid bypass surgery and save
patients' lives. She shared sales data that showed how many unmet needs
would result if supply couldn't be stepped up substantially. And then
she made a request. "We have the chance to do something \[for patients
and for ourselves\] that no company has ever done in the history of our
industry. We have an obligation to rise to the challenge. And if you'll
rise to the challenge, we'll do all we can to make your lives easier
during the tough times." She offered a new frame and was rewarded with a
new level of personal motivation.

Within half an hour, employees had made a list of all the things
management could do to help them through the holidays---including
shopping for their presents, wrapping them, supplying late-night taxis,
bringing in pizza, and so on.

Production hit new records, and the stent was available on time for all
patients who needed it.

Total sales almost tripled in one quarter. Employees earned nice
bonuses. But more importantly, the employees who went through this
experience felt as if they were part of something important. A moral
quest.

When you swap coercive methods with personal choices, you open up the
possibility of influencing even the most addictive and entrenched
behaviors. You gain access to one of the most powerful human
motivations: the power of the committed heart.

People can actually love engaging in behaviors that otherwise might seem
obnoxious. But only if they're allowed the psychological freedom to
choose them.

#### Tactic 2. Create Direct Experiences {.h4}

The most powerful way to help people recognize, feel, and believe in the
long-term implications of their choices is to get out of their way and
let them experience them firsthand.

For example, healthcare safety expert Dr. Don Berwick once taught a
Harvard seminar for CEOs of some of the largest hospital systems in
[]{#ch3.xhtml#page_61 type="pagebreak"}the world. The list of attendees
was a literal Who's Who of patient safety. These leaders were sipping
lattes, jotting notes, and having a delightful seminar experience as
they learned ways to improve the overall healthcare experience and
eliminate costly hospital errors. And although it was a stimulating
*intellectual* experience, Dr. Berwick had seen this happen so many
times before that he knew the stimulating-lecture format would influence
*no one*. All would return home, say they had a great time, email their
notes to their management team, and generate no real change.

![Images](Grenny_0303.jpg)

Dr. Don Berwick overcame resistance by inviting executives into a direct
experience of a medical mistake.

"Then I had an idea," Dr. Berwick told us. "On the spur of the moment, I
said, 'Look, before you come to the session next month, find an injured
patient, someone who was harmed while in your hospital. And *you*
investigate the injury. Do not delegate it. You find out what happened
and come back and report it.'"

Dr. Berwick was unsure what would happen. Would the CEOs complete the
assignment? Would they return with diagrams or data dumps? Or would it
awaken passion?

The answer was emphatic: "Unbelievable!" he said. "I didn't know this
would happen, but these people came back---I'm talking three-piece
[]{#ch3.xhtml#page_62 type="pagebreak"}suit, high-end executives---and
one by one they choked up and cried as they told their stories. They
described the illusions they had about their systems and how fallible
they now realized they were."

As a result of this poignant firsthand experience, many of these leaders
not only became champions for patient safety, but they remained
champions *for the rest of their careers*.

What happened here? Dr. Berwick operated on the belief that the problem
with these leaders was not some moral deficiency. These were mothers and
fathers, brothers and sisters---all of whom were capable of caring about
human pain and suffering. However, the healthcare world around them
shielded them from the human pain and suffering caused by the current
behavior of their employees. Pain, suffering, and deprivation had been
turned into numbers, statistics, and charts. Patient safety for them was
a "compliance" issue, not a moral imperative.

Dr. Berwick trusted that if he gave senior leaders an experience that
connected them with the human consequences of their hospital's current
behavior, they would truly *care*. And it did.

The most potent tactic for engaging personal motivation is *direct
experience*. Everywhere we've traveled we've seen leaders develop clever
ways of helping connect people with the consequences of their choices so
they begin to feel differently about new and better behaviors.

::: {.sidebar}
**Act Like an Influencer**

When Dan Schulman kicked off American Express's effort to offer more
financial services to less affluent customers, he began by immersing his
executive team in a direct experience of "the life of the unbanked." The
team spent the day trying to tackle typical normal financial
transactions using only methods available to those without bank accounts
or credit cards. The experience of standing in line at check-cashing
stores in dangerous areas, []{#ch3.xhtml#page_63
type="pagebreak"}seeking out retail outlets to pay a utility bill with
cash, wiring money, and so on created immediate empathy and a sense of
moral duty to serve the new customer segment. His new team returned with
both greater motivation and ability to launch a successful new product
line for underserved customers.
:::

##### Ask People to "Just Try It" {.h5}

People tend to resist new behaviors because they're crystal clear about
what they'll lose by changing but uncertain about what they'll gain.
When it comes to change, humans tend to overvalue what they're losing
while undervaluing what they gain. And no amount of cheerleading will
allay the fears as fast a hands-on experience.

The Other Side Academy's Dave Durocher confronts this fear of change
every single day. It's his job to ask new students to do things that, to
them, sound painful, boring, or both.

For example, lifetime criminals have no idea what a law-abiding life
might be like. They assume that it will be very much like their present
life---minus the fun. You know, cleaning toilets while giving up the
excitement of crime or the stimulation of drugs. They're unable to
imagine the pleasure associated with getting a raise, owning a home, or
gaining any of a thousand other perks of a law-abiding life.

Durocher could spend a lot of time lecturing about the Academy vision.
"Trust me," he could say, "you're gonna love it. By the time you're out
of here, you'll have a high school diploma. You'll be literate. You'll
have gone to concerts and museums. You'll have mastered three different
trades and tried a dozen others. You'll have a whole new set of friends.
Just sign here."

Right.

These arguments are hard to sell because Durocher would be describing
activities and outcomes for which his audience has no
[]{#ch3.xhtml#page_64 type="pagebreak"}frame of reference. He's also
asking them to make immediate sacrifices (no gang, no drugs, no freedom)
in order to achieve them.

It won't work. It can't work.

Durocher realizes that it'll take a while before new students
*personally experience* the benefits of a new life. "Every one of our
students leaves with at least a high school equivalency. But early on,
they hate the discipline that it takes to study. Coming in, students
hate everything they haven't done before. But of course they've never
done *anything*!"

So Durocher simply plods forward, demanding that students try studying
for a class, attending the opera, mentoring another student, and so
forth. Experience has taught him that if students try new behaviors,
they end up liking many, if not most of them.

Durocher sticks with the strategy of asking students to simply try
things until every single one has an experience like Jessica's, when she
suddenly realized she now feels wonderful about something she once
didn't understand or care about.

Dave says it happens to virtually everyone at The Other Side Academy.
They transform into the kind of people they've scarcely met before. They
care. They take satisfaction in accomplishment. And Durocher helps them
get there by inviting them to have bite-sized direct experiences.

::: {.sidebar}
**Act Like an Influencer**

Holding a job can't be fun, right? That's why they call it work. Many
young people don't expect to like work, but then they quickly change
their minds once they experience it.

One of the authors has had several high-school-age nieces and nephews
spend summers with him and their auntie in Park City, Utah. Park City is
fun in the summer, with lots of hiking and cycling, but there's a catch.
In order to play in the mountains, []{#ch3.xhtml#page_65
type="pagebreak"}these young people also have to work at a job for 40
hours a week---and it's a volunteer job, where they serve wounded vets
and disabled children. A typical job involves belaying at one end of a
climbing rope, while the disabled vet on the other end struggles up a
climbing wall.

Most of these high schoolers rebel at the very thought of volunteering
for such work. However, by the end of the first week, they can't wait to
show up for their shift. They see the positive impacts they are having,
and they love the feelings of fulfillment.
:::

#### Tactic 3. Tell Meaningful Stories {.h4}

The challenge with offering people direct experiences is that it's tough
to create them for all of the people you need to influence. Is there
something you can do that offers some of the power of direct experience
without consuming so much time and so many resources?

##### Snakes on a Campus: The Power of Vicarious Experience {.h5}

To answer this important question, we'll visit the chief theorist behind
many of the influence principles we're about to discover: Dr. Albert
Bandura. One of Bandura's many contributions to the science of influence
was his remarkable work in the 1970s with people who had phobias. His
insights shined light on dealing with unmotivated---even
terrified---subjects.

When Bandura came on the phobia scene, the common treatment consisted of
years on a couch. The accepted theory at the time was that phobias
originated in some critical childhood experience, and the only way out
of them was by resurrecting and resolving those memories. Dr. Bandura
took a different view. Rather than dredge up the past, he took a more
direct route by creating firsthand experiences in the present.

[]{#ch3.xhtml#page_66 type="pagebreak"}![Images](Grenny_0304.jpg)

Dr. Albert Bandura showed how vicarious and direct
experiences---exposure to the very things they are most afraid
of---could help people overcome their phobias.

Bandura ran an ad in the *Palo Alto News* asking readers who had a
paralyzing fear of snakes to descend into the basement of the psychology
department to get cured. Hundreds volunteered. All who responded had
been seriously debilitated by their unreasonable fear of things that
slither. Most had horrible nightmares; many were veritable shut-ins.
They were desperate for help.

Like any good leader, Bandura began by defining the result he wanted to
achieve and how he would measure it. Success, he decided, would be
achieved when subjects could sit with a six-foot red-tailed boa
constrictor draped across their lap. Could a goal be clearer?

When they began, none of the subjects would so much as enter the room
containing a snake in a covered terrarium. Bandura's very description of
the objective caused some to pass out.

Bandura resisted any effort to rush or coerce the subjects. Instead, he
offered options and allowed them to choose. If people wanted to opt out,
they could. If they wanted a simpler task, he would devise one. They
were in control at all times.

Bandura's strategy began with a secondhand experience. He asked subjects
to watch a research assistant handle a snake. He invited
[]{#ch3.xhtml#page_67 type="pagebreak"}subjects to watch from the
doorway of the room---or if that was still too difficult, to watch
through glass---as the assistant walked into the room containing the
snake, took a look at it, opened the terrarium, petted the snake, and
finally removed the boa and placed it on his or her lap.

After the subjects watched someone else handle the snake, Dr. Bandura
invited them to have a direct experience. First they would simply walk
into the room. Some of the subjects asked for protective gear---hockey
goalie gloves, a baseball catcher chest protector and mask, and so on.

Subjects entered the room and stood next to the enclosed tank.
Gradually, after several tries, they worked up to removing the terrarium
cover and then quickly retreating from the room. No harm done. After a
bit more experience, they finally touched the snake. Then they touched
the snake without gloves, and so forth. Eventually subjects sat in the
room by themselves with the six-foot boa constrictor draped across their
lap.

And now for the real miracle: the entire process took only three hours!

People who had been debilitated most of their lives by a paralyzing fear
were completely cured in a single morning. And the results lasted a
lifetime.

Once the subjects with snake phobias had a personal and positive
interaction with the snake, they never regressed, and it improved their
lives forever.

In Dr. Bandura's own words, "It was surprising to see how liberating it
was for the subjects to be freed from the phobia. Their whole life
seemed to open up before them now that they didn't have to worry about
snakes. In addition, they gained confidence about their ability to make
personal changes. Since they had been able to conquer their fear of
snakes, perhaps now they could overcome other problems."

##### []{#ch3.xhtml#page_68 type="pagebreak"}The Influence of a Story {.h5}

Another way of creating vicarious experience is through storytelling.
This powerful influence tool is available to all leaders and requires
zero resources and very little time.

Although it clearly takes more than a story to drive change, when used
in combination with other sources of influence, storytelling is an
essential tool in any leader's repertoire.

The most convincing field experiment in the entire history of behavioral
science research makes exactly this point. In 1993, Martha Swai changed
the behavior of an entire nation by simply telling a story.

Swai was the program manager for Radio Tanzania. Her goal was to change
the behavior of her fellow Tanzanians in order to strengthen families,
improve the lot of women, and save lives from HIV/AIDS. Televisions were
not widely available in Tanzania, so as a program manager for a radio
station, she had access to millions of ears every single night.

Swai hired the best dramatic writers she could find to create a story
showing the vital behaviors she wanted to effect and the consequences of
ignoring them.

Swai's task wasn't easy because those she was trying to influence held
deep beliefs about how men should relate to women and about what causes
AIDS and what cures it. For one, many thought that men could be cured of
AIDS by having sex with a virgin.

When the time came to launch the radio show, disaster struck.
Bureaucratic problems blocked Radio Tanzania transmission during the
show's airtime to the large Dodoma region of central Tanzania. This
programming barrier turned into a social science bonanza---as we'll
shortly see.

In 1993 the show *Twende na Wakati* ("Let's Go with the Times") hit the
airwaves. To demonstrate the cause and effect of AIDS, writers created a
flamboyant, macho, and highly controversial truck driver named Mkwaju.
He abused his wife, wanted only male children, drank
[]{#ch3.xhtml#page_69 type="pagebreak"}excessively, engaged in
unprotected sex with prostitutes along his route, and bragged about his
escapades. His wife, Tutu (a model for female independence), eventually
left him and succeeded in her own small business.

Over the course of many months, the philandering Mkwaju (who eventually
died of AIDS) became so real to the listening audience that when the
actor playing him went to a local vegetable market, women who recognized
his voice threw produce at him!

To see the emotional and behavioral impact firsthand, we interviewed
several listening groups just outside Tanzania's capital city. One
family group consisting of a father, mother, grandmother, aunt, and five
grown children had religiously tuned in to the wild antics of Mkwaju and
had been enormously affected. When we asked them how the program had
influenced them, the father explained that at first he had admired
Mkwaju, but with time he concluded that the truck driver's behavior was
causing pain to his wife, Tutu, and their children.

And one day, when sweet Tutu was hurt by her alcoholic husband, a light
went on---his own wife was also suffering from similar treatment.
Although this avid listener wasn't a truck-driving philanderer, he had
abused alcohol. A part of him was Mkwaju.

From that moment on he stopped abusing alcohol and his family members.
It seemed strange that this self-discovery would come through a
contrived radio show, but as the transformed father finished his story,
everyone in his family nodded in energetic agreement. He had truly
changed.

Similar interviews provided anecdotal evidence that *Twende na Wakati*
was more than just a story. It created a poignant, believable vicarious
experience. It didn't merely provoke emotions. It changed minds. It
changed people's moral arithmetic about their choices in a way that led
to lasting change.

But the evidence for the efficacy of Martha Swai's work goes far beyond
our anecdotal interviews. *Twende na Wakati* accidentally
[]{#ch3.xhtml#page_70 type="pagebreak"}became the first controlled
national field experiment in history. Since the Dodoma region of
Tanzania was excluded from the evening radio broadcasts, researchers
could explore the effect of the vicarious experiences offered over the
radio.

Renowned social scientists Everett Rogers and Arvind Singhal found that
one-fourth of the population in the broadcast area had modified its
behavior in critical ways to avoid HIV, whereas no similar change had
occurred in areas where the show wasn't available. The impact was so
remarkable that the controlled experiment had to be stopped after two
years in order to make the intervention available to everyone. Within a
year, similar results were seen in Dodoma. People who tuned in to
*Twende na Wakati* were more likely to seek marital counseling, make
better use of family planning, remain faithful to their spouses, and use
protection.

Storytelling isn't just for TV and radio. Time and again we watched
leaders awaken people to the profound choices they were making by
telling believable and compelling stories that put a human face on
people's actions. Independent of the industry---whether healthcare, IT,
financial services, manufacturing, or telecommunications---leaders who
effectively build a sense of mission in their organizations are *always*
storytellers.

Take, for example, Union Square Hospitality Group (USHG) where Danny
Meyer trains leaders to use stories to turn dining hospitality into a
human mission. At the Shake Shack one day, the "Lou" episode we
described earlier played out in real life. As Lou malingered in the
dining area of the Shake Shack, his supervisor approached him and said,
"Hey Lou, a few minutes ago a young mother walked into our patio area
holding the hand of her three-year-old daughter. She set her daughter up
on a chair and walked to the window to order their food. While her back
was turned, her daughter began sweeping her hand back and forth across
the table that was smeared with ketchup from a previous guest. Then she
began licking her hand."

[]{#ch3.xhtml#page_71 type="pagebreak"}Lou cringed. He didn't even wait
for his boss to finish the *story*---but instead, rushed to grab a rag
and began wiping down the tables.

What happened here? The supervisor made a connection. Rather than
relying on verbal persuasion to nag or threaten, she created a vicarious
experience. She told a story that helped awaken Lou to the moral content
of his actions. The frame changed, and the feeling followed.

Now, is it possible that Lou may need more than this to become a
hospitality zealot? Yes! The remaining chapters add just such richness.
But personal motivation is a great start.

When influential leaders recognize that others aren't personally
motivated to enact a vital behavior, they don't work *around* that
problem. They work *through* it. They operate on the confidence that
people are not morally defective, but morally asleep. When called for,
they create vicarious experiences through telling compelling stories.

On that fateful night when one of the authors retrieved his delinquent
son from the police station, the initial silence in the car was
deafening. Finally, Dad pulled to the side of the road and said, "Hey
Brian, it's been a tough day, hasn't it?" Brian looked at his father
suspiciously, then conceded, "Yes, it's been awful." Dad continued, "I
understand, son. I've made mistakes, too. There will be consequences to
face, but you'll get through this." Brian seemed to relax. Dad
continued, "But you know what, Brian? There's someone else who had a
tough night, too. Can you think of who that is?"

Brian looked confused, then said, "No. Who?"

Dad said, "Imagine you're driving a car and suddenly a big hard object
slams into your windshield. Maybe even cracks it. How would that feel?"

Brian looked startled by the question. Then he hung his head and said,
"Dad, I don't have to guess how she felt. I know how she felt, because
after she slammed on the brakes I could see her put her head down on her
steering wheel. I think she was crying."

[]{#ch3.xhtml#page_72 type="pagebreak"}In the first moments after a
critical incident, leaders have an opportunity to frame the moment. The
first words out of your mouth let others know what this is about. Is it
about obeying rules? Is it about protecting the family's reputation in
the community? Or is it about the safety of a human being? How
differently would that moment have gone if Dad had started with a
lecture, punishment, or stony silence? Instead, he drew his son into a
vicarious experience and offered the opportunity for him to reframe his
decision to throw a water balloon.

Moments later in the car, Brian said, "Dad, do you think I could get
that woman's phone number? I'd like to call her and apologize." When you
change the frame, you change the feeling.

#### Tactic 4. Make It a Game {.h4}

Let's look at one more way of transforming neutral or detestable vital
behaviors into something enjoyable.

It turns out that one of the keys to personal motivation lies in a force
just barely outside the activity itself. It lies in the mastery of
increasingly challenging goals. Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, a researcher at
Claremont Graduate School, has devoted his career to "flow," or the
feeling of enjoyment that comes from losing yourself in an engrossing
activity (something, he suggests, we all should be seeking with dogged
determination).

Dr. Csikszentmihalyi discovered that almost any activity can be engaging
if it involves reasonably challenging goals and clear, frequent
feedback. These are the elements that turn a chore into something that
feels more like a game. And we all like games.

For example, imagine that you removed the scoreboard from a basketball
court. Not too many fans would stick around without knowing the score.
And how long do you think the players would run breathlessly up and down
the court?

Much of what we do to transform intrinsically unpleasant behavior into
something enjoyable is merely turning it into a game.

[]{#ch3.xhtml#page_73 type="pagebreak"}Consider the elements of an
enjoyable game:

•   **Keeping score.** Clear, frequent feedback can transform tasks into
accomplishments that, in turn, can generate intense satisfaction. The
designers of many of today's video games have an intuitive feel for Dr.
Csikszentmihalyi's research and have used it to create games that call
for highly repetitive activities that end up being amazingly addictive
as individuals strive for that next level of achievement.

•   **Competition.** Seeing numbers does more than provide data. It
frames the data with meaning: Am I doing better than *before*? Am I
doing better than *others*? This element is more questionable (it can
lead to unhealthy rivalry)---but to be honest, competition, especially
with oneself, can help people take satisfaction from what would
otherwise be a repetitive task.

•   **Constant improvement.** How many of us track our daily step count
or screen time on a smartphone or watch? The proliferation of tools to
enable "the measured life" have made tracking sleep habits, blood
pressure, and fitness tasks a global obsession that has helped reframe
unpleasant habits into gamified satisfaction.

•   **Control.** Earned points and rewards should be in the
participants' control. At work people often miss this element when their
personal or team progress is folded into a larger, less successful
unit's overall results. Employees lose any sense of control over their
own contributions. Create and record measures individuals can control.
Let them see the impact of their work. For many, the impact is far more
rewarding than the job itself.

By tapping into the intrinsic human desire for accomplishment,
competition, improvement, and control, gamifying vital behaviors can
naturally amplify personal motivation.

### []{#ch3.xhtml#page_74 type="pagebreak"}SUMMARY: PERSONAL MOTIVATION {.h3}

We often don't act in our long-term best interest because gratification
from our short-term bad actions is real and immediate, whereas negative
consequences are often fuzzy, maybe not so bad after all, and most
certainly a long time off.

The good news is that how people experience behaviors can change. You
can come to love things you previously hated, and you can come to hate
things you previously found irresistible. Much of this transformation
happens through framing---how you frame is how you feel. Influential
leaders help others change how they feel by using four powerful
reframing tactics:

**1.**   Allow for choice.

**2.**   Create direct experiences.

**3.**   Tell meaningful stories.

**4.**   Make it a game.

::: {.sidebar}
[]{#ch3.xhtml#page_75 type="pagebreak"}A change of heart can't be
imposed; it can only be chosen. People are capable of making enormous
sacrifices when they have the choice to act on their own. An influential
leader's job is to help them find their own reason to choose the vital
behavior.
:::

^[\*](#ch3.xhtml#r_ch3fn1){#ch3.xhtml#ch3fn1}^ In order to protect
privacy, Jessica and some other students' stories are composite
cases---they draw on actual events and backstories from multiple
students of both The Other Side Academy and Delancey Street Foundation.

[]{#ch4a.xhtml}

[]{#ch4a.xhtml#page_76 type="pagebreak"}![Images](Grenny_0401.jpg)

[]{#ch4.xhtml}

[]{#ch4.xhtml#page_77 type="pagebreak"}4 {#ch4.xhtml#ch4 .h2n}
----------------------------------------

HELP THEM DO WHAT THEY CAN'T {.h2ta}
----------------------------

*Source 2: Personal Ability*

*When you develop the discipline to examine possible ability barriers,
you substantially increase your potential for effective influence.*

Let's turn now to source 2, *personal ability*. As we move to the right
side of the model, we don't just add another source of influence---we
challenge our default way of understanding and influencing behavior. Our
natural tendency is to attribute most negative behavior to motivation
problems and almost never consider whether *ability* is playing a role.
If you want to influence change, it's best to do the opposite: consider
ability problems first, motivation second.

[]{#ch4.xhtml#page_78 type="pagebreak"}Consider the case of Henry who is
currently struggling to drop the 50 pounds he's added since his job
started putting him on the road where, twice a week, he now eats at
delightful restaurants. Henry has joined a team of coworkers who are
collectively trying to lose weight (partly to keep their insurance costs
in control and partly to feel better), but he's not doing that well. One
of Henry's vital behaviors---snacking on mini carrots rather than
chocolate---is at risk. In fact, at this very moment, Henry is pulling
the foil back on a partially eaten Swiss chocolate bar. In Henry's
defense, he didn't buy it. A colleague who just returned from Europe and
knew of his deep affection for chocolate gave it to him. The tempting
bar has been sitting on his desk for over a week.

Moments ago Henry decided to heft the hardy confection merely to see
what two pounds felt like. When he did, he noticed that the adhesive
holding the wrapper around the inner foil lining had failed. It appeared
as if it were about to fall away, seductively revealing the beautiful
red, shiny foil beneath it---the last defense before the chocolate
itself.

Henry tugged at the wrapper playfully, and with almost no effort it came
free. The next few seconds were almost a blur. Without thinking, Henry's
hands peeled back the top flap of the foil and exposed the deep, rich
color of the bar. In a rush, chocolate-filled childhood memories poured
through his head as his fingers pried loose a single section---a modest,
harmlessly small packet of pleasure. He brought the treat to his
lips---and then it was over. The chocolate began its inexorable
transformation from cocoa, fat, and sugar to disappointment.

Here's the problem. While Henry's taste buds are delivering pleasure,
his soul is racked with shame. His problem, he is convinced, is that
he's weak. He's doomed to caloric servitude because he has no character,
grit, or willpower. Up until this sad indulgence, he had valiantly cut
back on calories while sincerely promising himself to start an exercise
regimen. This new, iron-willed Henry ruled for eight full days. And then
the mere touch of the red foil lining brought him to ruin.

[]{#ch4.xhtml#page_79 type="pagebreak"}Henry doubts he'll ever overcome
the genetic hand that he's been dealt. He has neither the
self-discipline to diet nor the determination to exercise. Surely he's
doomed to a life of poor health. But then again, unbeknownst to Henry, a
long line of research suggests that he can actually learn how to
withstand the temptations of chocolate as well as how to improve his
ability to exercise properly.

Many of the stories Henry has been carrying in his head since he was a
young man may be equally wrong. When his mother once told him that he
wasn't a gifted speaker and later when his father suggested that
leadership "wasn't his thing," Henry believed that he hadn't been born
with "the right stuff." He wasn't born to be an elite athlete; that's
for certain. Later he learned that music wasn't his thing, and his
interpersonal skills weren't all that strong. Later still he discovered
that spending in excess, getting hooked on video games, and gorging on
Swiss chocolate *were* his thing. But none of this is going to change,
he concludes, because Henry can't fight genetics.

Fortunately, Henry is wrong. Henry is trapped in what Stanford
psychologist Carol Dweck calls a "fixed
mindset."[^1^](#notes.xhtml#r_ch4notes1){#ch4.xhtml#ch4notes1} If he
believes he can't improve, then he won't even try, and he'll create a
self-fulfilling prophecy. But Henry is in luck. Genes don't play the
fatalistic role scholars once assumed. Characteristics that had long
been described by scholars and philosophers as genetic gifts or lifelong
personality traits appear to be learned, much the same way one learns to
walk, talk, or whistle.

That means Henry doesn't need to accept his current status. He can adopt
what Dweck refers to as a "growth mindset." Henry simply needs to learn
how to learn. But he won't take that step until he first understands
that his problem is one of ability as much as motivation. This pivotal
insight is a key difference between successful influence and repeated
failure.

To illustrate this point, let's consider the lengthy hunt researchers
conducted to find the root of self-discipline.

[]{#ch4.xhtml#page_80 type="pagebreak"}![Images](Grenny_0402.jpg)

Dr. Dweck's research on mindset has had a significant impact on fields
such as education, business, and sports.

Professor Walter Mischel of Columbia University, curious about people's
inability to withstand temptations, set out to explore this issue. Did
certain humans have the right stuff while others didn't? And if so, did
the right stuff affect lifelong performance? What Mischel learned
altered the psychological landscape forever.

### MUCH OF WILL IS SKILL {.h3}

When Timmy, age four, sat down at the gray metal table in an
experimental room in the basement of the psychology department, he saw
something that caught his interest. On the table was a marshmallow---the
kind Timmy's mom put into his hot chocolate. Timmy *really* wanted to
eat the marshmallow.

The kindly man who brought Timmy into the room told him that he had two
options. The man was going to step out for a moment. If Timmy wanted to
eat the marshmallow, he could. But if he waited []{#ch4.xhtml#page_81
type="pagebreak"}a few minutes until the man returned, then Timmy could
eat *two* marshmallows.

Then the man exited. Timmy stared at the tempting sugar treat, squirmed
in his chair, kicked his feet, and in general tried to exercise
self-control. If he could wait, he'd get two marshmallows! But the
temptation proved too strong. Timmy reached across the table, grabbed
the marshmallow, looked around nervously, and shoved the spongy treat
into his mouth.

Timmy was one of dozens of subjects Dr. Mischel and his colleagues
studied for more than four
decades.[^2^](#notes.xhtml#r_ch4notes2){#ch4.xhtml#ch4notes2} Mischel
was interested in learning what percentage of his youngsters could delay
gratification and what impact, if any, this character trait would have
on their adult lives. Mischel's hypothesis was that children who were
able to demonstrate self-control at a young age would enjoy greater
success later in life because of that trait.

In this and many similar studies, Mischel followed the children into
adulthood. He discovered that the ability to delay gratification had a
more profound effect than many had originally predicted.

#### The Marshmallow Skill {.h4}

Though the researchers had watched the kids for only a few minutes, what
they learned from the experiment was enormously telling. Children who
had been able to wait for that second marshmallow matured into adults
who were more socially competent, self-assertive, dependable, and
capable of dealing with frustrations. They scored an average of 210
points higher on their SATs, got promoted more often, and had happier
and more enduring relationships.

Apparently, Mischel had stumbled onto the mother lode of personality
traits. The fact that a four-year-old's onetime response to a tempting
marshmallow predicts lifelong results is at once exciting and
depressing---depending on whether you are a "delayer" or a "grabber."

[]{#ch4.xhtml#page_82 type="pagebreak"}But is this what's really going
on in these studies? Are some people wired to succeed and others to
fail? Is the capacity to delay gratification about hardwired motivation
or a learnable ability?

In 1965, Dr. Mischel collaborated on a study with Albert Bandura to
explore this
question.[^3^](#notes.xhtml#r_ch4notes3){#ch4.xhtml#ch4notes3} In an
experiment similar to the marshmallow studies, the two scholars placed
children who had failed to delay gratification into contact with adult
role models who knew how to delay. The grabby kids observed adults who
avoid picking up the marshmallow by putting their heads down for a nap
or getting up from the chair and engaged in some distracting activity.
They observed learnable skills for delaying gratification. And to
everyone's delight, they followed suit.

After a single exposure to an adult model, children who previously
hadn't delayed suddenly became stars at delaying. Even more interesting,
in follow-up studies conducted months later, the children who had
learned to delay *retained* much of what they had learned during the
brief modeling session. It appeared that *will* might be a *skill*.

This is important news to all of us and most certainly offers hope to
Henry. When Dr. Mischel took a closer look at individuals who routinely
held out for the greater reward, he concluded that delayers are simply
more *skilled* at avoiding short-term temptations. They didn't merely
avoid the temptation; they employed specific, learnable techniques that
kept their attention off what would be merely short-term gratification
and on their long-term goal of earning that second marshmallow.

But before any of this is useful to Henry, or the rest of us who are
trying to influence positive change, we must first recognize that the
three *ability* sources of influence are involved in more ways than we
ever imagined in shaping the habits we're after. Your ability to
influence change is determined by how well you understand today's
behavior.

For example, when you see Lou eating french fries and sending texts on
his phone rather than greeting customers, it's tempting to conclude
[]{#ch4.xhtml#page_83 type="pagebreak"}the problem is that Lou is a
slug. He is doing what he's doing because he is lazy and self-centered.
This is an open-and-shut motivation problem!

But what if there's more going on? What if at least part of the problem
is that he feels awkward around customers? What if he lacks social
skills? What if he hasn't been well trained in basic cleaning tasks?
When you develop the discipline to examine possible ability barriers,
you substantially increase your potential for effective influence.

Once Henry understands this, he'll know his life can improve if he
learns *skills* for delaying gratification. But will that be enough to
transform him into the physically fit person he'd like to become? He
considers himself incompetent at all things athletic. Surely factors as
hardwired as body type, lung capacity, and musculature are predictors of
good athletic performance. Henry has no hope of ever becoming one of
those chiseled hunks you see hanging out at health clubs. Right?

### MUCH OF PROWESS IS PRACTICE {.h3}

Psychologist Anders Ericsson has offered an interesting interpretation
of how those at the top of their game get there. After devoting his
academic life to learning why some individuals are better at certain
tasks than others, Ericsson has repeatedly demonstrated that people who
climb to the top eclipse their peers through what he calls *deliberate
practice*.[^4^](#notes.xhtml#r_ch4notes4){#ch4.xhtml#ch4notes4} And our
research shows that this same discipline is a must in an effective
influence strategy.

As the saying goes, practice doesn't make perfect; *perfect* practice
makes perfect. Ericsson argues there is substantial evidence that people
who achieve exceptional performance only get there through carefully
guided practice---*perfect* practice.

For instance, Ericsson has described how dedicated figure skaters
practice differently on the ice: Olympic hopefuls work on skills they
have yet to master. Club skaters, in contrast, work on skills they've
[]{#ch4.xhtml#page_84 type="pagebreak"}already mastered. Amateurs tend
to spend *half* of their time at the rink chatting with friends and not
practicing at all.

Skaters who spend the same number of hours on the ice achieve very
different results because they practice in very different ways. In
Ericsson's research, this finding has held true for every skill
imaginable, including memorization, chess, violin, public speaking,
getting along with others, and holding high-stakes conversations.

Ericsson found that no matter the field of expertise, when it comes to
elite status, there is no correlation between time in the profession and
performance levels. A 20-year-veteran brain surgeon is not likely to be
any more skilled than a 5-year rookie by virtue of time on the job. Any
difference between the two has nothing to do with experience and
everything to do with deliberate practice.

In this case, surgeons who receive detailed feedback against a known
standard develop far more rapidly than colleagues who practice their
same old methods over and over again.

Certainly, time is required (most elite performers in fields like music
composition, dance, science, fiction writing, chess, and basketball have
put in 10 or more years). But time is not the critical variable for
mastery. The critical factor is using time wisely. It's the *skill* of
practice that makes perfect.

Roger Bacon once said that it would take a person 30 to 40 years to
master calculus---the same calculus that is taught in most high schools
today. Today's musicians routinely match and even surpass the technical
virtuosity of legendary musicians of the past. And when it comes to
sports, the records just keep falling. For example, when Johnny
Weissmuller of Tarzan fame won his five Olympic gold medals in swimming
in 1924, nobody expected that years later *high school* kids would post
better times. This was all made possible through deliberate practice.

#### []{#ch4.xhtml#page_85 type="pagebreak"}What Is Deliberate Practice? {.h4}

So, what is this all-important discipline of *deliberate practice*? To
see it in action, come with us to the top of a 40-meter ski ramp. A
10-year-old girl named Zia stares down the ramp shaking as much with
worry as from the cold. Months ago, at Zia's insistence, her mother
signed her up to learn ski jumping from former Olympians. It seemed like
a great idea at the time. But now, standing on a mountain staring down
what appears to be an endless chute, she has doubts.

Yesterday, the first day of ski jumping school, her instructors had her
glide effortlessly down a 20-meter ramp. While today's challenge is only
20 meters longer, to Zia the stakes feel much higher. In an attempt to
calm herself she says, "I'll be fine. I'll do it. Here goes . . .
something . . . I guess." Hearing the tremor in her voice, her coach
gives her timely advice: "Just remember, never snowplow. Skis straight.
That's all you need to focus on. It's just a longer 20!"

Zia repeats his advice, seizing hold of the reassurance in "It's just a
bigger 20! That's all!" Her breath calms and she leans forward to begin
her rapid descent. By the time she is 30 meters down she is screaming
with exhilaration. "Oh yeah! It's so fun! Sixty seems like nothing now!"

The next day she gets her first air off a 60-meter ramp. After her
classmates complete their run, the coach skis to the bottom of the hill
where they discuss what happened, then ride to the top for another run.

This brief episode is influence genius. It's a perfect illustration of
the three elements of deliberate practice that should be part of any
effort to address *ability*. In a few short minutes, this influential
coach had his pupils:

**1.**   Practice one or two specific skills

**2.**   At the edge of ability

**3.**   With immediate feedback and coaching

[]{#ch4.xhtml#page_86 type="pagebreak"}Ericsson's research shows that
when these elements are present, skill acquisition accelerates. And when
they are absent (which they are in most "learning" settings), very
little growth occurs. Here's what that looks like in Zia's case.

##### 1. Practice One or Two Specific Skills {.h5}

The coach doesn't inundate Zia with a dozen skills. He simply says,
"Just remember, never snowplow. Skis straight. That's all you need to
focus on." He avoids offering the kind of vague abstractions you hear in
most learning settings. Little improvement comes from chanting "Be the
change you want to see" or "Give 110 percent!"

What people need to build ability is not vacuous philosophy but specific
skills.

##### 2. Practice Skills at the Edge of Ability {.h5}

Zia is practicing at the sweet spot for improvement: a bit beyond her
current capacity. People learn best under conditions of mild stress. Too
much stress shuts down learning, and too little shuts down attention.

##### 3. Practice with Immediate Feedback and Coaching {.h5}

Finally, *immediately* after her performance, the coach tells her what
to do differently the next time and *immediately* has her take another
run. The more immediate the feedback and next attempt, the more
accelerated the learning.

This all might seem obvious for athletic pursuits like ski jumping, but
does it apply to an array of workplace behaviors you might want to
influence in others? Consider a common problem at hospitals. A surgeon
has just committed a medical error. While performing a mastectomy, she
has accidentally ripped a tiny muscle guarding the patient's chest
cavity, but she doesn't notice her error.

The anesthesiologist sees a gauge jump, so it appears as if one lung is
no longer taking in air. Two of the nurses assisting the operation
[]{#ch4.xhtml#page_87 type="pagebreak"}see similar signs of distress. If
the medical team doesn't start corrective action soon, the patient could
die. But before the action can be taken, either the surgeon needs to
take responsibility or one of the other professionals needs to raise an
alarm.

Let's focus on the staff members who are assisting and predict what they
might do. Most would certainly hesitate to suggest the surgeon made a
mistake because if they don't handle the situation well, they'll come
off as flippant or even insubordinate. There are legal issues at play,
which makes the discussion that much more delicate. Maybe they've seen
colleagues who've expressed a concern, turned out to be wrong, and then
received a tongue-lashing. Better to let someone else take the risk.
Precious seconds continue to pass.

One large healthcare organization decided that this moment was too
important to leave to chance. They were dissatisfied to learn that
medical mistakes were confronted less than 15 percent of the time by
those who witnessed
them.[^5^](#notes.xhtml#r_ch4notes5){#ch4.xhtml#ch4notes5} So they went
to work influencing a new vital behavior of peer accountability. A key
to their remarkable improvement was deliberate practice.

They had teams of doctors and nurses practice witnessing errors and
speaking up. They developed specific scripts that they would be
comfortable delivering, practiced in their working environment with
their colleagues, and were given immediate feedback when their approach
fell flat. These practice episodes rarely took more than 15 minutes. And
in spite of their brevity, those units that used deliberate practice saw
substantially more improvement in peer accountability.

#### You Can't Change a Life Without Building Skills {.h4}

There are few better examples of the importance of addressing *ability*
as part of an influence effort than The Other Side Academy. The Other
Side Academy helps people change their lives by having them practice
real skills to solve real problems. And they give them a lot of
feedback.

[]{#ch4.xhtml#page_88 type="pagebreak"}Take Leo. After 6 years of living
on the streets and 20 years as a heroin addict, he stumbled into the
front door of the Academy and asked for an interview. He was emaciated,
dejected, and covered with sores.

Many would argue that those with long criminal histories or patterns of
homelessness simply lack motivation. "If they simply wanted to change,
they would change" goes the argument. Dave Durocher tells us otherwise:
"When our students arrive they know almost nothing about how to live a
sober, honest, healthy life. They've honed skills for coping rather than
living for decades."

Leo, for example, had never held a job. He was an expert at finding food
in dumpsters, navigating homeless service providers, negotiating for
drugs, panhandling, avoiding conflict, and dozens of other skills. What
he didn't know how to do was get up every day, get along with imperfect
people in a workplace, and manage money. That's where living at the
Academy came in.

One day Leo was in a peer-coaching meeting when one of his fellow
students said, "Leo, you sit like a homeless guy." Academy students
don't mince words. At first, Leo was offended. Then he looked at
everyone else in the meeting, then at his own sunken abdomen and
extended legs. Having recognized the difference, he pulled in his legs,
sat up straight, and began acquiring a new set of skills. In subsequent
weeks and months, with coaching and feedback from his peers, he learned
posture, eye contact, vocabulary, and table manners that suited him well
for the life he wanted.

::: {.sidebar}
*Learn how a Texas-based furniture company used the Six Sources of
Influence to grow revenue, cut expenses and delivery mishaps, and
improve employee and customer satisfaction---all during a recession.
Read the Gallery Furniture case study at
[CrucialInfluence.com](http://CrucialInfluence.com).*
:::

[]{#ch4.xhtml#page_89 type="pagebreak"}Let's look at another example of
deliberate practice, this time in an office setting. After a
disastrously public customer service failure, former Starbucks CEO
Howard Schultz recognized the need to help baristas manage the
inevitable emotional turbulence of their jobs. On the fateful day, a
customer had been brusque with a barista when placing her order. In
response, the barista wrote a profanity rather than the usual customer
name on the coffee cup.

The story went viral, causing embarrassment and brand damage. Schultz
wisely concluded that a lasting solution would take more than simply
firing a single employee. He saw the incident as an indication of a lack
of skill more than a problem of willful petulance. As evidence, he
closed every store in the world for a full day to allow employees to
practice new skills for managing these moments of emotional overwhelm.

To see the importance of ability and deliberate practice in influencing
change, let's return to the example of the father picking up his
13-year-old from the police station. Following his request for the
victim's phone number, Brian was silent for a few minutes. Finally,
hanging his head, he said, "Dad, to be honest, when the guys started
filling the water balloons, I thought I should say something, but I
didn't know what to say."

Now, what did Brian just tell you? Is he describing a motivation or an
ability problem? If you aren't careful, you'll classify it as we often
do as a motivation problem and offer him a sermon on courage. But that's
not what he needs! This is why learning to examine your influence
problem through *all* of the sources is so crucial. If you don't, you'll
miss perfect moments for appropriate influence.

The father immediately pulled the car once again to the side of the
road, turned to his son, and said in playful seriousness, "Son, you're
in luck! I'm one of the world's leading experts in Crucial
Conversations. And you have me in the car with you!"

Brian rolled his eyes, but continued. "What would you have said, Dad?"

[]{#ch4.xhtml#page_90 type="pagebreak"}The father offered a possibility
that Brian immediately rejected. "They would think I was an idiot if I
said that!"

Undeterred, Dad asked Brian, "What would have been better than that?"

Brian chewed his lip for a moment, then burst out with a phrase that Dad
thought wasn't especially inspired. He added one suggestion for change,
and Brian tried it out.

Brian said, "That would have worked! I totally could have said that, and
they would have listened!"

The phrase wasn't anything brilliant, but that didn't matter. All that
mattered was whether Brian was willing to take a stand next time he was
in a risky situation. So Dad had him rehearse it some more. "OK," Dad
said, "Say it again."

He did. Dad had him do it a third time and then asked, "So if you are
pressed to do something wrong in the future, will you say that?" Brian
pledged to do so. And Dad pulled back onto the road.

Notice what just happened. All the father did was engage Brian in about
four minutes of deliberate practice. He practiced a concrete skill,
while keeping in mind the stress of the recent episode so the practice
would be in realistic conditions. The practice pushed him at the edge of
his previous ability. And he got immediate feedback and coaching. But
that moment would never have happened had his father not appreciated
that he was facing a lack of ability, not simply a motivation problem.

Many of the profound and persistent problems we face stem more from a
lack of skill than from a genetic curse, a lack of courage, or a
character flaw. Self-discipline and elite performance, long viewed as
character traits and genetic gifts, actually result from guided practice
of clearly defined skills. Learn how to practice the right actions, and
you can master everything from withstanding the temptations of chocolate
to holding an awkward discussion with your boss.

::: {.sidebar}
[]{#ch4.xhtml#page_91 type="pagebreak"}**Act Like an Influencer**

The leaders at Newmont Corporation running a gold mine in remote Ghana
were trying to reduce automobile accidents by asking their drivers to
stop speeding. They discovered most drivers didn't want to speed, but
they felt they had to because of an awkward interpersonal situation.
They were often asked to drive senior leaders to the airport, a two-hour
drive, and these leaders were notorious for cutting it too close. They
didn't allow enough time to catch their flights, so their drivers had to
speed.

The vital behavior that could solve this problem was for drivers to call
the senior leaders an hour in advance to remind them of their scheduled
departure time. For the drivers, this was a very awkward and
countercultural call to make. It was an ability problem. So they
brainstormed scripts they thought could help with more skillful team
members. They practiced. They also practiced what they would say when
leaders arrived late anyway. Then they invited the safety manager and
several senior leaders in for a discussion, where they role-played the
conversations with the actual senior leaders who sometimes terrified
them.

These role-playing opportunities built both competence and confidence
that helped drivers follow through on the vital behavior during very
crucial moments.

To hear the rest of the Newmont story, read their case study at
[CrucialInfluence.com](http://CrucialInfluence.com).
:::

### []{#ch4.xhtml#page_92 type="pagebreak"}SUMMARY: PERSONAL ABILITY {.h3}

Changing behavior almost always involves learning new skills.
Exceptional leaders make it a priority to engage people in deliberate
practice.

If you want to succeed at influence, spend more time engaging people in
practicing the new behaviors you want them to enact. Make sure that
practice involves:

**1.**   Practice of one or two specific skills

**2.**   At the edge of ability

**3.**   With immediate coaching and feedback

And finally, be sure you help people develop not just the technical, but
the interpersonal and *intrapersonal* skills they will need to succeed.
Engage them in practice in addressing emotions that might undermine
their attempts to change. Help them learn to skillfully move from the
*go* to the *know* parts of their brains so they can overcome impulses
that might keep them from success.

Remember the good news here. Overcoming bad behaviors or developing
complex athletic, intellectual, and interpersonal skills are not merely
functions of motivation, personality traits, or even character. They all
tie back to ability. Help people develop greater proficiency at
deliberate practice, and you will significantly increase your chances
for turning new behaviors into long-standing habits.

::: {.sidebar}
[]{#ch4.xhtml#page_93 type="pagebreak"}Our natural tendency is to
attribute most negative behavior to motivation problems and almost never
consider whether ability is playing a role. If you want to influence
change, it's best to do the opposite: consider *ability* problems first,
motivation second.
:::

[]{#ch5a.xhtml}

[]{#ch5a.xhtml#page_94 type="pagebreak"}![Images](Grenny_0501.jpg)

[]{#ch5.xhtml}

[]{#ch5.xhtml#page_95 type="pagebreak"}5 {#ch5.xhtml#ch5 .h2n}
----------------------------------------

PROVIDE ENCOURAGEMENT {.h2ta}
---------------------

*Source 3: Social Motivation*

*We are inescapably shaped by those around us.*

No source of influence is more inescapable than source 3, *social
motivation*: the persuasive power of the people who make up the social
networks of those you hope to lead. None. The ridicule and praise,
acceptance and rejection, approval and disapproval of fellow beings can
do more to assist or destroy our influence efforts than anything else.

Smart leaders appreciate the tremendous power humans hold over one
another, and instead of denying it, lamenting it, or attacking it, they
embrace and enlist it. They use the power of social influence to support
change by ensuring that the right people provide encouragement,
coaching, and even accountability during crucial moments.

### []{#ch5.xhtml#page_96 type="pagebreak"}PUSHING PEOPLE PAST THEIR LIMIT {.h3}

In 1961, psychologist Stanley Milgram set out to find US citizens
similar in disposition to what most people believed were the crazy
misfits, fundamentalists, and psychological wrecks who had marched Jews,
Poles, Romanies, and countless others into the gas chambers at
Auschwitz. The world was unnerved by what he discovered.

Mystified by what had happened in Hitler's Germany, Dr. Milgram was
interested in what *type* of person could be compelled to annihilate his
or her innocent friends and neighbors. Naturally, blind fundamentalists
who followed unspeakable orders in the name of political zealotry would
be hard to locate in the suburbs of Connecticut. Nevertheless, Milgram
was determined to track down a few of them and put them under his
microscope.

Of course, Milgram couldn't create circumstances under which his
neighbors actually killed each other. But maybe he could trick subjects
into *thinking* they were killing someone else. Milgram ran an ad in the
New Haven newspaper asking people to take part in an experiment that
lasted one hour and for which they would be paid
\$4.50.[^1^](#notes.xhtml#r_ch5notes1){#ch5.xhtml#ch5notes1} Interested
people reported to the basement of Linsly-Chittenden Hall on the campus
of Yale University. They were told they were taking part in a study that
examined the impact of negative reinforcement on learning.

While waiting for their turn to earn \$4.50, subjects chatted with
another participant about the upcoming job. This friendly stranger was
actually a confederate of Dr. Milgram's who was working as part of the
research team.

Next, a scientist in a lab jacket would appear and ask each of the two
participants to reach into a bowl and draw out a slip of paper to
determine who would perform which of the two jobs in the study. One
would be a teacher, and one would be a learner.

In actuality, both slips said "teacher," guaranteeing that the actual
research subject would take the role of the teacher.

[]{#ch5.xhtml#page_97 type="pagebreak"}The teacher accompanied the
learner and the researcher into a small booth where the learner was
invited to sit down while the researcher applied special paste to his
arms. "This," he explained, "is to ensure solid contact between your
skin and the electrodes when we administer the shocks."

At this point, the learner explained, "A few years ago in the veterans'
hospital I was told I had a bit of a heart condition. Will that be a
problem?" To which the researcher confidently said, "No. While the
shocks may be painful, they are not dangerous."

After strapping the electrodes to the learner, the researcher closed the
booth door and took the teacher (the subject) to an adjoining room.
There the teacher would see a frightening piece of electrical machinery
with which he or she would deliver shocks to the learner. To reassure
subjects that the machine was pumping out real electrons, each teacher
would be given a 45-volt burst from the machine as a sample of the
initial shock the learner in the other room would receive during the
experiment. It hurt.

Again, the researcher explained that the reason for administering shocks
was to measure the impact of negative reinforcement on learning. The
teacher was told to read a list of paired words loud enough for the
learner to hear in the adjoining room. The teacher then read the first
word in each pair, and the learner tried to recall the second word. If
the learner got the word wrong, the teacher threw a switch that shocked
the poor learner with the supposed heart problems. With each subsequent
missed word, the teacher flipped another switch, administering a higher
voltage and a more painful shock.

Of course, the learner wasn't actually being shocked. Instead, with each
increase in voltage, the researcher played a prerecorded audio clip that
the subject could hear through the wall. With the first shock came a
grunt. The second shock produced a mild protest. Next, stronger
protests. Then screaming and shouting. Then screaming and banging on the
wall with a reminder that he had heart problems. Eventually, when
[]{#ch5.xhtml#page_98 type="pagebreak"}the voltage levels exceeded 315
volts, the teacher heard nothing but silence as he or she read the
words, raised the voltage, and flipped the switch.

Milgram suspected he would have to experiment with a lot of subjects
before he'd find anyone who would proceed past 315 volts. In fact, when
Milgram asked a sample group of psychologists to predict the results of
this study, they suggested that only 1.2 percent of the population, only
a "sadistic few," would give the maximum voltage.

When you watch black-and-white film clips of Milgram's actual subjects
taking part in the study, the hair stands up on the back of your neck.
At first these everyday folks off the streets of Connecticut chuckle
nervously as they hear the learner grunt in protest after being given a
45-volt shock. Some show signs of stress as they increase the voltage
and the learner starts to shout. Many pause at around 135 volts and
question the purpose of the experiment.

If at any time the subjects called for a halt, the scientist in the
white lab jacket said that the experiment required them to continue---up
to four times. If subjects requested to stop a fifth time, the
experiment stopped. Otherwise, the experiment came to an end only after
the subject had given the maximum 450 volts---to a learner who was no
longer responding---giving the teacher the distinct impression that the
learner had either passed out or died.

Clearly the subjects who continued to send more and more volts took no
pleasure in what they were doing. It's unnerving to watch clips as
anguished subjects suggest that they should stop the torture. But when
told by a person in a white lab coat to continue, they comply. And not
in the low numbers Milgram and hundreds of psychologists predicted.

As it turned out, 65 percent of subjects continued to 450 volts. In
another version of the experiment, Milgram paired subjects with another
confederate playing the role of a fellow teacher who appeared to
blithely go along with instructions. Under this condition, *90 percent
of subjects reached 450 volts*.

[]{#ch5.xhtml#page_99 type="pagebreak"}Dr. Milgram hadn't discovered a
tiny handful of Connecticut zealots who would gladly give their souls
over to the totalitarian cause as he expected. He had found the
vulnerable target within all of us. He had looked for the sadistic few
and found himself---and you and me.

### THE POWER OF SOCIAL INFLUENCE {.h3}

Decades of experiments in social psychology make one thing clear: we are
inescapably shaped by those around us. We are hardwired to look to
others for *affirmation*, *information*, *inspiration*, and
*association*. While this human tendency accounts for tremendous human
achievements, Milgram's experiment, provoked by Nazi genocide, gives a
dire warning of how this source of influence can be used for ill
purposes. Our craving for *affirmation*, our willingness to unthinkingly
consume *information* from dubious experts, and our hunger to *belong*
can be used to manipulate us in horrifying ways. But the right response
of leaders to these cautions is not to avoid, but to embrace the
positive use of social influence. If those leading positive change fail
to profit from social influence, they cede its power to those with
lesser motives.

Great leaders ensure that people feel praised, emotionally supported,
and encouraged by those around them every time they enact vital
behaviors. And they ensure that people feel discouraged or even socially
sanctioned when they make the wrong choice.

Our decades of studying social change taught us three things about
social influence:

**1.**   Social influence starts with you. No influence effort can
succeed if the leader doesn't "walk the talk."

**2.**   The pace of change is determined by how quickly formal leaders
and opinion leaders join in.

**3.**   Peer accountability is the ultimate accelerant for change.

Let's take a look at how each of these findings can help you harness the
power of social motivation.

### []{#ch5.xhtml#page_100 type="pagebreak"}IT STARTS WITH YOU {.h3}

We once watched a striking example of social influence. The CEO of a
large defense contractor, whom we'll call Ken, was trying to transform a
rather timid culture into one in which individuals openly stated their
differing opinions to resolve long-standing problems.

After months of lecturing, Ken faced a crucial moment. In a meeting of
his top 200 managers, he extended an invitation. "I've been told that
I'm unapproachable," he began. "I am trying to work on it. But to be
honest, I don't know what it means entirely. I'd appreciate feedback
from any of you who would be willing to help me."

For a few seconds, the auditorium felt like a morgue. As Ken scanned the
audience for any takers, he was about to break the awkward silence and
move on to a new topic when a woman named Shirley raised her hand.
"Sure, Ken. I've got some suggestions."

With that announcement, Ken set an appointment to talk one-on-one with
Shirley. As you might guess, from that moment on most of the
water-cooler chatter was about the foolish risk Shirley had just taken.
Pay-per-view could have made a fortune selling access to the private
meeting between Ken and Shirley. But in the end, the entire story came
out---from Ken.

After meeting with Shirley (and with Shirley's permission) Ken sent out
an email detailing the feedback he'd received. Just as importantly, Ken
sincerely thanked Shirley for her candor. He finished by making
commitments to a couple of changes he hoped would make him more
approachable, and he followed through.

In this instance, Ken showed genuine support of candor by sincerely
listening to the person who had taken the risk to be honest, and he then
made personal changes to demonstrate his commitment. His actions
demonstrated his willingness to walk the talk, and the results were
far-reaching. Within months, candor among employees increased
[]{#ch5.xhtml#page_101 type="pagebreak"}measurably across the entire
organization. Employees began to open up and successfully solve
problems.

What was it about this single incident that amplified its influence?
First, the leader led. Second, an opinion leader helped. And third, the
two of them created a memorable vicarious experience for the other 199
managers.

Shirley's role was crucial. But the first ingredient of success was the
leader. It all begins with you. Notice also that the vital behavior Ken
advocated conflicted with people's past perception of him. And yet in
spite of that, this pivotal moment influenced remarkable change. Let's
examine how.

::: {.sidebar}
**Act Like an Influencer**

A nurse manager begins staff meetings by sharing "the good, the bad, and
the ugly" of what has happened during the last week. She usually begins
with her own observations. In so doing, she models that it's safe to
share bad news and failures, without any sugarcoating.

When others take the risk to share challenges and setbacks they've
experienced, she responds with appreciation: "That's a great
observation!" "Thanks for noticing that!" Her reactions show that it's
safe to speak honestly. The team then uses these stories of failures and
successes to improve future care.
:::

#### Lead the Way {.h4}

The first place to look for social influence is in the mirror. When you
ask people to take on new behaviors, the first question they ask is,
"Why should I follow *you*?" When you ask people to change, many of
[]{#ch5.xhtml#page_102 type="pagebreak"}the new behaviors are far more
physically or emotionally challenging than what's required to maintain
the status quo. You're asking people to step from a familiar,
comfortable action into a world of uncertainty or difficulty.

![Images](Grenny_0502.jpg)

Muhammad Siddiqui (top right) sacrificed time to connect with opinion
leaders in their homes.

For example, we worked with Mohammad Siddiqui, CEO of the South Sudan
affiliate of telecommunications and digital services giant MTN. When
Siddiqui took the job, he inherited a pretty cynical workforce. Due to
political unrest and economic upheaval, local currency had lost 85
percent of its value. Thus, his workforce was living on 85 percent less
than it had a year before. In addition, employees saw management as
unsympathetic and demanding.

Employee engagement and productivity were unacceptably low. Siddiqui was
under pressure to dramatically improve results. He knew he would need
the full intellectual engagement of his employees in order to make
progress. So he started an effort to foster a new vital behavior. He
wanted all employees to "speak up irrespective of the level or position
of the person you need to address."

[]{#ch5.xhtml#page_103 type="pagebreak"}His employees were stunned.
First, because this was counter to the country's culture. In South Sudan
there is a strict sense of propriety about who speaks to whom---much
less who *disagrees* with whom. And second, here was the man they partly
associated with their unsatisfactory wages. He had explained that the
company would not survive if it gave substantial across-the-board pay
increases. And now he was asking his employees to behave in ways that
were terribly uncomfortable---even risky. Not a chance. They saw the
invitation as a trick, a way of pretending to address employee concerns
with no sacrifice from management.

When you ask people to step into a place of uncertainty and change, they
look to you to take their cues. They look at your behavior.
Unfortunately, they have a bias for interpreting your behavior in ways
that confirm rather than deny their existing concerns or mistrust. To
encourage them to change, you have to generate clear, unambiguous
evidence that they can believe you. But how?

#### Sacrifice Breathes Life into Dead Values {.h4}

Many people believe that the only way to build social influence is to
slowly build a relationship of trust with those you lead. "Give it time"
is the mantra. But such a belief is an influence death sentence for
someone like Siddiqui. He was a new CEO, from another country no less,
who needed to influence change today---not five years from now.

Fortunately, as we saw with Ken, the "give it time" theory is largely
wrong. Within months Siddiqui built so much social influence with his
team that behavior began to change in remarkable ways. What did he do to
make his stated beliefs both clear and credible---in an environment
where people could draw negative conclusions about anything he did?
Siddiqui learned that making a *sacrifice* can be a powerful influence
accelerant.

The first thing Siddiqui did was unprecedented in South Sudanese
culture. He listened and apologized. In public discussions with
employees, []{#ch5.xhtml#page_104 type="pagebreak"}he listened carefully
and attended to the pain they were experiencing due to the massive
depreciation of their currency. He empathized with their plight,
brainstormed ways he could help soften the blow, but ultimately
explained that if the company was to remain viable (and they were to
keep their jobs), there was little he could do.

However, as employees left these candid sessions, more than one remarked
that this was the first time they had ever heard a leader quietly,
humbly, and sincerely say the words "I am sorry." Something inside them
began to stir.

Siddiqui didn't stop there. One weekend Siddiqui and his seven-year-old
daughter visited the home of Jafar (not his real name)---a
well-respected MTN employee. Jafar, positioned 10 levels below Siddiqui
in the job of janitor, was stunned when the big boss and his daughter
called and asked to visit. At the appointed time, Siddiqui arrived. He
paid homage to the home. He warmly greeted Jafar's father and mother,
who lived with Jafar. He inquired about Jafar's circumstances. He
expressed gratitude for Jafar's long service and promised to do his best
as a leader to earn his trust.

Each weekend Siddiqui paid similar visits to other employees from
throughout the organization. In a matter of months, the talk about
Siddiqui's invitations to change were no longer ridiculed. The
widespread view was that this was a man they could trust. A man who
*deserved* their support.

If you want to increase your influence with those you hope to help
change---knowing full well that others can simply discount your speeches
or misinterpret your actions---you're going to have to make some
*sacrifices.* You must regularly demonstrate your sincerity by
generating indisputable evidence that you believe in what you say. You
say that openness is important and then sacrifice pride to prove your
point.

MTN employees had seen generations of leaders who valued being held in
high esteem (even being deferred to) above all else. Bosses are
important. Then along came a man who was willing to sacrifice his
[]{#ch5.xhtml#page_105 type="pagebreak"}own pride and be treated as a
peer. He called for openness and candid dialogue. He listened. He
apologized. He entered humble homes. This was a man who walked the talk.

Let's take a look at four kinds of sacrifices that can act as a trust
accelerant in your influence efforts: time, money, ego, and other
priorities.

##### Time {.h5}

Siddiqui's behavior was remarkable because it illustrated sacrifice on
many levels. One of the most compelling sacrifices was with his time.
When people heard about his personal visits to employees' homes, they
wanted details. They wanted to know what he said. How he behaved. Where
he sat. But also, how long he stayed.

We all know time is a finite commodity. No one has any more of it than
anyone else. No one has found a way to create more of it. So we trust
that it is a credible demonstration of our values.

Had Siddiqui made a brief and effusive five-minute visit, it would have
sent an entirely different message than his hour-long conversation over
tea did to everyone. If you want to persuade people that you are
serious, sacrifice your time.

##### Money {.h5}

We (the authors) became loyal customers of the car rental company Hertz
after 9/11. Two of us were in Dallas, Texas, on business when the attack
came. Since all aircraft were grounded indefinitely, we were left with
no way to get home to our worried families. We placed a call to Hertz to
ask how much it would cost to drive the rented car the 2,500 miles from
Dallas to Salt Lake City. The agent replied, "Nothing. We've got this.
You take the car wherever you need to go. You get home to your family.
Turn it in at the most convenient Hertz location. There will be no
drop-off fee. Take care." We were speechless.

We knew that Hertz talked about customer service. Its ads were full of
such ideas. Now we believed that it actually did care about customers.
[]{#ch5.xhtml#page_106 type="pagebreak"}Why? Because the company took a
huge hit to the bottom line (at least in the short run) to do what was
best to serve its customers in a time of crisis. Anyone who sacrifices
money to serve customers cares about customers.

##### Ego {.h5}

You're going to screw up. There will be times that you behave in ways
that are opposite of the vital behaviors you hope to foster. But this
isn't the end of the world. In fact, it can be a powerful opportunity
for you to enhance trust by sacrificing ego.

We once worked with a leader we'll call Liz. Liz was a facility manager
in Kuala Lumpur. Her campaign to improve quality screeched to a halt one
day at the end of a manager briefing when she responded to questions
written on cards from the 200-person audience. One comment read,
"Yesterday you and the execs from Japan were supposed to do a facility
tour. My team spent all weekend preparing for the tour and you never
showed up." Liz's face turned red. She slapped the card down on the
rostrum. She removed her glasses, then said, "Yesterday I had a decision
to make. I had to decide whether to spend two hours with our senior
executives touring the facility, or discuss the future of the company. I
chose the latter and would do the same today. Next question?" The
session ended quite uncomfortably.

Liz was immediately repentant. She knew she had just damaged trust. She
knew she had violated her own vital behaviors (which didn't include
putting someone down in a meeting and becoming righteously indignant).
Fortunately, it all changed the next week during a similar briefing. As
Liz began, she stepped from behind the podium. She bowed her head. And
she said with some emotion. "Last week I behaved despicably." She went
on to describe what had happened. Then concluded with, "I beg your
forgiveness. That was unacceptable. And I will not do that again." And
she didn't.

[]{#ch5.xhtml#page_107 type="pagebreak"}Ironically, the apology had a
more powerful effect on trust than if she had behaved perfectly in the
previous meeting. In that moment of public contrition her team learned
that her espoused value of openness and respect were more important than
her ego.

A mistake or two is not the end of the world---so long as you
demonstrate what matters most by sacrificing ego to integrity.

##### Other Priorities {.h5}

There was a time when some employees at Lockheed Martin Aeronautics
wrongly concluded that their CEO, Dain Hancock, was all about image.
That he cared more about impressing outsiders than about attending to
employee needs---including listening to what they had to say.

This changed one day when Dain was holding an employee feedback meeting.
Fifteen minutes into the 90-minute session his secretary rushed in to
announce: "The prince is here two hours early."

Visiting royalty was scheduled to arrive following the session to
discuss a multibillion-dollar order of F-16s. Dain paused. Every
employee in the room would have understood if he had canceled the
session. Instead, Dain assigned his COO to bring his apologies and greet
the prince. Dain's decision to continue the feedback session over
attending to the prince took mere minutes to ripple across the
13,000-person facility. By sacrificing what people had previously
perceived to be his priority (impressing outsiders), Dain's stated value
of listening to others gained enormous credibility and went a long way
in encouraging others to do the same.

![Images](common1.jpg)

The first responsibility for creating social support for change lies in
your own actions. Nothing makes a new vital behavior seem more credible
[]{#ch5.xhtml#page_108 type="pagebreak"}than when you sacrifice time,
money, ego, and other priorities to demonstrate that what you *say* is
important to you really *is* important to you.

### ENGAGE FORMAL AND OPINION LEADERS {.h3}

We've seen that one person, especially a formal leader, can have an
enormous effect on motivating others to enact vital behaviors. If you
want to influence change, it's essential that you engage the chain of
command.

Smart leaders spend a disproportionate amount of time with formal
leaders to ensure that they use their social influence to encourage
vital behaviors. They develop specific plans for formal leaders to
regularly teach, model, praise, and hold people accountable for behaving
in new and better ways.

But there's a second, often overlooked, group of people whose social
support or resistance will make or break your influence efforts. To find
out who this group is and how to enlist it, let's take a look at the
work of Dr. Everett Rogers. His contribution to influence theory has
important implications for how all parents, coaches, and business
leaders can use social support.

After graduating with a PhD in sociology and statistics, Dr. Rogers took
a job with the local university extension service. It was his
responsibility to encourage Iowa farmers to use new and improved strains
of corn. The new strains produced greater yields and were dramatically
more disease resistant, and therefore far more profitable than current
strains. What could be easier?

At first, Dr. Rogers figured his job would be easy. He had made a
careful study of the crops farmers should grow. He was now working for
the experts in agronomy. He figured that when he talked, farmers would
be taking notes and thanking him for helping them increase their yields.

But it didn't work that way. As Rogers talked with local farmers about
the terrific new seeds he was recommending, he quickly learned
[]{#ch5.xhtml#page_109 type="pagebreak"}that his education and
connection to the university didn't impress them. He wasn't exactly one
of them.

Dr. Rogers wasn't just different. In the farmers' view, he was the wrong
kind of different. He had never plowed a field. Sure, he said he read
books, but what if he was wrong? Who would dare put their annual harvest
at risk by listening to a young fellow just out of college? None of the
farmers, that's who.

After being rejected by his target population, Rogers grew desperate.
What good is it to invent better methods if no one will put them into
practice? The very advance of civilization relies on citizens letting go
of old, inefficient ways and embracing new, efficient ones. And Rogers
just happened to know what those better ways were---at least for the
farmers.

What could Rogers do if people wouldn't listen to *him*? Perhaps, he
concluded, he could get a farmer to embrace the new strains of corn. If
a person from within the farming community could point to the better
results, everyone would be happy to follow.

He found one willing participant. This particular farmer was very
open-minded. He was also a rather hip fellow who wore Bermuda shorts and
drove a Cadillac. He had a proclivity for embracing innovation. He tried
the new strains of corn and enjoyed a bumper crop. But no one cared. The
next season, not one additional farmer planted even an acre of the new
strain.

Apparently this willing farmer was also too much of an outsider to have
strong influence in the wider group.

This unvarnished failure changed the course of Rogers's life. He spent
the rest of his career learning what happens to innovations as they move
through a social system.

#### Opinion Leaders Versus Early Adopters {.h4}

Dr. Rogers was shocked to discover that the merit of an idea did not
predict its adoption rate. Instead, what predicted whether an innovation
[]{#ch5.xhtml#page_110 type="pagebreak"}was widely accepted or not was
whether a specific group of people embraced it. Period.

Rogers learned that the first people to latch on to a new idea are
unlike the masses in many ways. He called these people "innovators."
They're the ones in the Bermuda shorts. They tend to be more
well-informed on and open to new ideas. But here's the important point.
The key to getting the majority of any population to adopt a vital
behavior is to find out who these innovators are *and avoid them like
the plague*. If they are the only ones who embrace your new idea, it
will die.

The second group to try an innovation is made up of what Dr. Rogers
termed "early adopters." Many early adopters are what are commonly known
as "opinion leaders." These important people represent about 13.5
percent of the population. They are also more well-informed, and they
tend to be open to new ideas. But they are different from innovators in
one critical respect: they are socially *connected* and *respected*. The
rest of the population---over 85 percent---will not adopt the new
practices *until opinion leaders do*.

When the fellow with the Bermuda shorts used the new seeds, he didn't do
Rogers a favor. Cadillac man was an *innovator*. He was the first to
adopt new ideas in his community, and like many innovators, his adoption
cast suspicion on the new ways he endorsed. Since he was different from
the majority of his peers in visible ways, and since much of what he did
appeared to disrespect traditional methods, this made him a threat. He
was neither respected nor connected. And thus, no one else bought in.

Great leaders we studied routinely use this powerful source of
influence. For example, when Dr. Don Berwick and IHI try to influence
the behavior of hundreds of thousands of physicians across the United
States, they first engage the *guilds*, as they call them. These are the
associations and research groups other physicians look to as credible
sources. When the guilds talk, physicians listen.

[]{#ch5.xhtml#page_111 type="pagebreak"}Likewise, Dr. Donald Hopkins and
his team at The Carter Center don't consider going into a Guinea
worm--affected village without first working with the village chief or
drawing on the power of a respected official. These formal leaders
identify respected village members from different groups or clans who
will be listened to when they teach people the vital behaviors for
eradicating Guinea worm disease.

"The message," Hopkins says, "is no more important than the messenger."

Opinion leaders can be influential even when they aren't real. The TV
and radio heroes in Tanzania we referred to earlier *become* opinion
leaders. For example, in the village of Lutsaan, India, a community
action group made a solemn covenant to educate their daughters after
listening to the wildly popular show *Tinka, Tinka Sukh* ("Happiness
Lies in Small Things"). In this poignant TV drama, a beloved young girl
dies in childbirth after being forced into an early marriage. After
vicariously experiencing her death, audience members wrote over 150,000
letters in reaction to the episode. Listeners were so affected by what
happened to the young girl that 184 Lutsaan villagers placed their
thumbprints on a large public poster in honor of their fallen heroine in
a gesture of solidarity and support.

"Of course I will not marry off my daughter before she turns 18," one
listener told Dr. Arvind Singhal, who was commissioned to study the
effects of the serial drama. "Prior to listening to *Tinka, Tinka Sukh*,
I had it in my mind that I need to marry off my daughter soon. Now I
won't, and I tell others as well."

*Tinka, Tinka Sukh* made double use of opinion leaders by ending each
episode with an epilogue during which a respected real person from the
community asked questions, made a call to action, and encouraged public
discourse.

::: {.sidebar}
[]{#ch5.xhtml#page_112 type="pagebreak"}**Act Like an Influencer**

At one of Danny Meyer's restaurants, a server was asked by a customer if
he knew where he could buy a good cigar along Madison Avenue. The server
responded that, while he didn't know the answer to *that*, he *did* know
one of the restaurant's staff had just returned from Puerto Rico and had
a great "stash" himself. The server returned with the colleague seconds
later and presented the guest with a gift of a fine cigar, pausing for a
moment to tell about the family from which it was procured and the
loving details about its preparation.

On hearing of this "hospitality legend," Danny invited the skillful
server to become a mentor. Mentors are chosen from respected opinion
leaders and then paired with newer employees to train them in the values
and norms of Union Square Hospitality Group. Danny uses valued opinion
leaders to encourage the vital behaviors that make his restaurants
extraordinary.
:::

Going back to the corporate world, we once watched a remarkable example
of opinion leader engagement in Dubai. Jyoti Desai, a telecom CEO, was
intent on breaking down silos and encouraging more inter--business unit
collaboration. To jump-start change, she carefully identified opinion
leaders from every area of the organization and invited them to a
three-day retreat alongside her entire management team.

Part of the retreat involved a candid 90-minute conversation between her
executive team---seated at the front of the room---and opinion leaders.
The topic: "What behaviors will executives need to change if we want
others to truly break down silos?" Feedback was fast and furious. At the
end, executives created a "Leadership Contract" []{#ch5.xhtml#page_113
type="pagebreak"}with opinion leaders, where they committed to six
behaviors they would change within themselves.

At the end of the process, Jyoti and her team signed the flipchart
listing the six behaviors. She then stood in front of the group and
said, "We will make these changes. And when we do, can we count on you
to teach this new way of working to others?" The response was a
spontaneous ovation. And subsequent behavior change across the company
was equally impressive.

![Images](Grenny_0503.jpg)

Jyoti Desai's willingness to sacrifice ego in candid dialogue with
opinion leaders earned her rapid support.

Dr. Everett Rogers's discovery offers enormous influence leverage. When
it comes to creating change, you don't have to worry about influencing
everyone at once. If you preside over a company with 10,000 employees,
your job is to find the 500 or so opinion leaders who are the key to
everyone else. If you supervise 20 people, odds are 2 or 3 of them hold
more sway over the team than others. Spend more time with them. Listen
to their concerns. Build trust with them. Be open to their ideas. Rely
on them to share your ideas, and you'll gain a source of influence
unlike any other.

### []{#ch5.xhtml#page_114 type="pagebreak"}HOW TO FIND OPINION LEADERS {.h3}

You don't get to decide whether or not you engage the help of opinion
leaders. By definition, they will always be engaged. They always observe
and judge your leadership strategy---that's what they do. Then they will
give your ideas either a thumbs-up or a thumbs-down in their informal
interactions with others. They will exert their widely felt influence
and decide the destiny of your strategy---whether you like it or not.

If you're interested in engaging opinion leaders in a large
organization, the good news is that finding them is quite easy. Since
opinion leaders are employees who are most admired and connected to
others in the organization, simply ask people to make a list of the
employees who they believe are the most influential and respected. Then
gather the lists and identify those who are named most frequently. These
are the opinion leaders. Once you know who they are, enlist them and
partner with them in your efforts to institute change.

::: {.sidebar}
*One of the world's oldest miners and producers of gold needed to
improve safety. They started by getting opinion leaders on board with
the change efforts. Read the Gold Fields case study at
[CrucialInfluence.com](http://CrucialInfluence.com) to see how well they
did.*
:::

### ENLIST PEER ACCOUNTABILITY {.h3}

One of the greatest barriers to any change project lies in unhealthy
norms. When you see behavior that is bad but everyone else sees it as
normal, you're in deep trouble. You can muster every other source of
influence to resist long-standing norms---but you're still likely to
fail in your effort to create change unless you take direct action to
create *a new sense of normal*.

But there's good news in this as well. Once you foster new norms, change
becomes almost inevitable---raising the question: How do you create new
norms?

[]{#ch5.xhtml#page_115 type="pagebreak"}Here's how:

**1.**   Make the undiscussable discussable.

**2.**   Create 200 percent accountability.

#### Make the Undiscussable Discussable {.h4}

Unhealthy norms are almost always sustained by a culture of silence. For
example, we found a terrible code of silence when conducting a multiyear
study of healthcare in the United States, Thailand, Australia, and the
United Kingdom. We began this study to discover why hundreds of
thousands of patients contract infections *while in the
hospital*.[^2^](#notes.xhtml#r_ch5notes2){#ch5.xhtml#ch5notes2}

When we asked neonatology nurses and doctors how infections find their
way into the pristine environment of a neonatal unit, people would lower
their voices, look both ways, and relate very similar stories. First was
the story of physicians who periodically failed to gown up, glove up, or
wash up as they should. Second was the story of nurses who, when
starting an IV on a very tiny baby, would cut a hole in their sterile
gloves to expose a fingertip. The nurses had a good reason for doing
this. It's extremely hard to find a vein on a baby who can fit in the
palm of your hand. Nevertheless, exposing the finger was a violation of
safety practices and sometimes spread infections to vulnerable babies.

The problem in this particular hospital was not merely that a doctor or
nurse broke rules. The problem was that there was a conspiracy of
silence that kept people from speaking when colleagues violated hygiene,
safety, or any other protocol. The existing social norm called for
silence. It stated that deferring to power players (like doctors or
nurse managers) was more important than protecting patients.

Nothing would ever change in these organizations until the norm changed.
Speaking up had to become as normal as donning scrubs.

We have poked around in every type of organization imaginable over the
years, and we have found this same code of silence that sustains
unhealthy behavior in every corner of business and government.
[]{#ch5.xhtml#page_116 type="pagebreak"}For instance, we conducted an
international study of project management where we explored the colossal
failure rates of major high-stakes projects, programs, and initiatives.

We knew from the outset that the vast majority of product launches,
reorganizations, mergers, and improvement initiatives either fail or
grossly disappoint. Roughly 90 percent of major projects violate their
own schedules, budgets, or quality standards.

So we searched for the cause behind these embarrassing results. We
learned that 88 percent of those we surveyed were currently working on
projects or initiatives that they predicted would eventually fail---yet
they continued to plod along.

Then we learned the reason behind the reason: *fewer than 1 in 10
respondents said that it was politically acceptable to speak openly
about what was going wrong.* Most suggested that problems such as weak
sponsorship, unreasonable constraints, or uncommitted team members were
eventually going to kill their efforts, but they said no one---including
the project managers themselves---could bring the issues out into the
open.

The first step to changing norms is breaking the code of silence that
*always* sustains the status quo. When you make the undiscussable
discussable, you openly embrace rather than fight the power of social
influence. Changes in behavior must be preceded by changes in the public
discourse.

To see how to take this first step toward creating new norms, let's
return to the Indian village of Lutsaan and revisit the mechanism
through which the radio drama *Tinka, Tinka Sukh* affected public
opinion. Although the villagers weren't facing hospital infections or
failed projects, they did run into a powerful social norm that caused
many of them great pain, and their problem was completely undiscussable.

The villagers went from silence around lack of education and early
marriage to openly committing to change. What brought about this
tremendous change in norms?

[]{#ch5.xhtml#page_117 type="pagebreak"}According to Dr. Arvind Singhal,
the power of the show stemmed from its ability to force an undiscussable
topic into the public discourse. Long-settled beliefs were suddenly
opened to question and discussed at every corner, workstation, and
shop---and eventually reshaped.

Before the episodes aired, millions of people had placed pressure on
their friends, children, and coworkers to continue to honor the
traditions of their past. This was peer pressure at its strongest. Some
people had already changed their views on the treatment of young girls,
but it was difficult for them to share their views openly without
falling victim to public ridicule. Many people were uncertain about the
tradition and wanted to be able to talk it through, but once again, it
just wasn't done.

Leaders applied the power of stories (vicarious experience) to the
issue. They didn't preach the evils of the traditional treatment of
girls because, as we all know, verbal persuasion typically leads to
resistance. But the leaders didn't back away either. Instead, they
created a serial drama containing likable characters who talked about
the social problem in the privacy of their home---while thousands
listened in. The beloved family discussed the pros and cons of the
tradition, and each show ended with the words of a respected narrator
who merely asked questions.

As the radio family experienced its tragedy, family members began
talking. They helped others first think about the issues and then talk
about them with their friends, coworkers, neighbors, and family. As a
result, an undiscussable became a discussable, and what had remained
underground for centuries wilted in the light of public discourse.

We've seen the same strategy work to reshape norms in organizations. For
example, in one world-renowned academic hospital, leaders were
struggling to engage their legendary physician leaders in improving the
quality of patient care. Most seemed focused on *learning* about disease
but seemed to care little about *treating people* who had diseases. And
yet no one would admit it publicly.

This all changed one weekend when we presented the chief medical officer
with a stack of 50 patient horror stories we had collected.
[]{#ch5.xhtml#page_118 type="pagebreak"}She told us later, "When I
returned home Friday night, I poured myself a glass of wine, sat in my
reading chair, and read the first story. Three hours and 50 stories
later I was emotionally overcome."

Beginning Monday morning, what had formerly been undiscussable became
widely discussed. The stories were shared, read, and studied. What had
been formerly only whispered was now openly debated. As the chief
medical officer broke the code of silence, her formerly complacent
organization took the first determined step toward change.

If you want to change an old norm, you have to talk about the old norm.
You have to talk about the new norm. You have to talk.

#### Create 200 Percent Accountability {.h4}

The pace of change is determined by the speed with which you can get
everyone to hold everyone accountable. Whether through encouragement of
the right behavior, confronting the wrong behavior, or a combination of
the two, the strength of new norms is dependent on the consistency with
which people are willing to speak up and defend them.

No one knows---or shows---this better than Dave Durocher. It's semester
break at The Other Side Academy. All 150 residents in the Salt Lake City
campus have gathered in the family room where they quietly jostle and
joke with one another. There's an air of excitement. After all, it's
graduation day. This means that some of the students are about to
advance to more responsible positions. Others will move to a new job.
Younger students may be ready to graduate from freshman, where the
requirements are pretty basic. But the accomplishment will be no less
celebrated than that of the person who is about to become a senior
leader.

So here the students sit, waiting for graduation to begin. Those who
haven't been through the ceremony before look terribly uncomfortable.
They know they will be singled out in front of hundreds of peers and
guests, and they have no clue how to deal with the moment. Then their
names are called. They stand up and are given a crisp green sophomore
shirt and a beautiful new pair of tennis shoes. They are told
[]{#ch5.xhtml#page_119 type="pagebreak"}that they have done good work
and are now assigned to food services. Congratulations!

![Images](Grenny_0504.jpg)

Tori Dixon, a student at The Other Side Academy, advances as a leader by
learning to hold others accountable.

All of a sudden, these new students hear a sound that has never before
been directed at them. Everyone is clapping for them.

"It's the most wonderful time," says Durocher. "They're crying. Huge
clapping. You'll see this huge guy who doesn't know what to do with his
arms because he's so uncomfortable. And it's the best thing in the
world."

So what's going on here? Dave knows how to gain an upper hand over his
number one enemy. The illegal, immoral, and antisocial behavior the
students formerly engaged in required a strong social system to support
it. Criminals run in packs. The distinctly different and healthy
behavior that the Academy will demand of each new student requires an
even stronger social system. So that's precisely what Dave serves up.
The Other Side Academy immerses residents in a whole new culture
composed of healthy expectations.

[]{#ch5.xhtml#page_120 type="pagebreak"}One of the Academy's vital
behaviors is "200 percent accountability"---for everyone to challenge
everyone. This means that from day one students are hit by an
unrelenting wave of social praise and social punishment. Durocher has
gone to great pains to structure positive and negative peer feedback
into every moment of everyday life. And since the feedback comes from
people who have lived the same life, it's hard for new students to
dismiss the data.

From day one, those arriving from jail or the streets are told they will
be expected to do three things: pull others up, pass information, and
play The Game. "Pull ups" are verbal corrections given by anyone to
anyone. Every student is expected to give brief verbal correction to
anyone they see violating a norm. Second, they are instructed to "pass
information"---meaning that after either being pulled up or pulling
someone else up, they are to notify their immediate supervisor (who is
just an older peer leader in the house). And finally, twice a week, they
play "Games." Games is a two-hour-long group feedback process where
students express their concerns with one another in greater detail. They
practice breathtaking candor, helping one another become aware of and
address their moral weaknesses.

For example, in a recent session of Games one student let another know
she resented his staring at the women in the house. He flushed red and
denied the claim until other men confirmed her observation. He left
humbled and more circumspect about his behavior. Another pointed out how
his teammate on the moving company seemed to carry pillows when others
were carrying heavy furniture. He resolved to be a better teammate.
Others were counseled by peers about lying, isolating, surliness, and
bigotry.

The sophisticated moral reasoning of these sessions is not only striking
given the background of the participants, but humbling to any who
participate. Freshmen experience a kind of social whiplash as they
discover that norms at the Academy are more than just words on a wall,
but are ironclad expectations of everyone in the house. The speed
[]{#ch5.xhtml#page_121 type="pagebreak"}with which social norms change
is not a function of time; it is a function of the speed with which
peers speak up when they're violated.

This is the secret of the Academy's success. Ensure that everyone
understands that they are not just 100 percent accountable---but 200
percent accountable. Create an environment in which everyone is
responsible not just to *enact* the vital behaviors themselves---but to
*hold others accountable* for them as well.

New norms take hold the instant people begin to defend them. When a
critical mass of people practice 200 percent accountability, change is
all but assured.

### SUMMARY: SOCIAL MOTIVATION {.h3}

People who are respected and connected can exert an enormous amount of
influence over any change effort. Under stressful and ambiguous
circumstances, a mere glance from someone who is considered to be a
respected official can be enough to influence people to act in novel
ways.

**1.**   **It starts with you.** When a vital behavior is difficult or
unpopular, you must lead the way. You must not just talk the talk---you
have to walk it as well. People aren't likely to trust your words until
you demonstrate your willingness to sacrifice old values for new ones.
You'll need to create visible and believable evidence by sacrificing
time, money, ego, and other priorities before people will take similar
risks themselves.

**2.**   **Engage formal and opinion leaders.** You will also need the
support of people with more immediate contact with those you're trying
to influence. The support of formal leaders and opinion leaders make it
safe for people to embrace innovation. Learn how to identify and partner
with these important people.

**3.**   []{#ch5.xhtml#page_122 type="pagebreak"}**Enlist peer
accountability.** Finally, sometimes change efforts call for changes in
widely shared norms. You can't change norms without discussing them; so
first, make it safe to talk about high-stakes and controversial topics.
Second, to create new norms, invite everyone to hold everyone else
accountable. Create a widely shared norm of 200 percent
accountability---where everyone is responsible not just to practice the
new behaviors, but to communicate clear expectations to everyone else.

Social influence, the deeply felt desire to be accepted, respected, and
connected to other human beings, sits at the top of the heap of all
sources of influence. Learn how to tap into the power of social
influence, and you can change just about anything.

::: {.sidebar}
[]{#ch5.xhtml#page_123 type="pagebreak"}Decades of experiments in social
psychology make one thing clear: we are inescapably shaped by those
around us. We are hardwired to look to others for affirmation,
information, inspiration, and association. Great leaders not only "walk
the talk," but they also ensure people feel praised, emotionally
supported, and encouraged by those around them.
:::

[]{#ch6a.xhtml}

[]{#ch6a.xhtml#page_124 type="pagebreak"}![Images](Grenny_0601.jpg)

[]{#ch6.xhtml}

[]{#ch6.xhtml#page_125 type="pagebreak"}6 {#ch6.xhtml#ch6 .h2n}
-----------------------------------------

PROVIDE ASSISTANCE {.h2ta}
------------------

*Source 4: Social Ability*

*Those around us form the "social capital" of our lives---the human
resources that help us surpass our individual limits.*

As we saw in the previous chapter, most of our actions are far more
influenced by others than many of us imagine. That's why great leaders
take care to ensure that those they want to influence are sufficiently
*encouraged* to adopt vital behaviors. But encouragement isn't enough.
Offering a supportive smile is good, but when people need permission,
information, coaching, or hands-on help, a friendly nod won't cut it.
Instead, you'll need to engage source 4, *social ability*.

### []{#ch6.xhtml#page_126 type="pagebreak"}EXAMPLE: ENGAGING SOCIAL ABILITY IN GRASSROOTS ENTREPRENEURSHIP {.h3}

We'll start this chapter with an example from one of the most remarkable
leaders we've ever met, Muhammad Yunus. His influence has extended to
hundreds of millions across the globe. One of whom is Tanika, whom we'll
introduce first.

Seated in a tight circle in a neat, tin-roofed building in a small
village in central India, we find five women---Tanika, Kamara, Damini,
Payal, and Sankul. They're in the middle of the most important meeting
they'll ever attend. They're selecting the businesses they'll start
through small loans from Grameen Bank, a microcredit firm that has set
up shop in the region.

Even though none of these women has ever held a job outside the home or
taken a single course in business, and even though all are caring for
their families with little or no help from their husbands or
ex-husbands, nobody will tell these five women what businesses to start.
They will invent businesses on their own.

Today each of the other women in this circle will offer feedback to
Tanika about her business plan. She is desperate to get started because,
like many women within a radius of several hundred miles, she lives in
gut-wrenching poverty.

"Maybe I can start an egg business like my friend Chatri," Tanika begins
with a shy smile.

"You can't start there," Sankul explains. "It takes three or four loans
to work your way up to such a large investment. We have to think
smaller."

Tanika nods with new understanding, then pivots, "My cousin Mitali has
done well with the minivan she rents."

Once again Sankul sets her friend straight. "That requires an even
larger investment. It has taken your cousin over five years to work her
way up to a vehicle. We're beginners and have to start much smaller."

[]{#ch6.xhtml#page_127 type="pagebreak"}"How about puffed rice," another
woman suggests helpfully. "It takes very little money, and I've heard
that many women in nearby villages are now doing well with this."

"That's the problem," Damini says. "Too many people are in that
business, and profits could drop."

For a moment, Tanika considers quitting the group. But her determination
to persevere hardens when images from recent weeks flood through her
mind. Three months earlier when her husband sold his rice crop for far
less than he had expected, he had taken it out on her. He came home one
evening screaming obscenities, assaulted her, accused her of dragging
him into poverty, called her ugly, and threw her and their three
daughters into the street.

Under normal circumstances in her village, a divorce such as this would
have been a death sentence for Tanika and her children. But these
weren't normal circumstances. One day as Tanika sat worrying about her
family's next meal, her neighbor Sankul told her about a group of people
from the city who would loan money to women like her as a means of
helping them start new businesses. She felt an intoxicating rush of hope
after her first information meeting. But soon her familiar feelings of
dread and shame returned. It was only Sankul's frequent reminders of
what her future would likely be without the loan that kept her from
giving up.

After a quiet moment, Tanika tries again, "You all know that I have
earned money in the past by collecting hair from the local barbershops
and making wigs."

"Yes, and they're beautiful," Sankul responds. "But you haven't been
able to live off of that." As a gentle but unrelenting rain starts to
beat its tattoo on the tin roof over the five women, Tanika continues to
articulate her partially formed idea.

"You're right; I can't count on wig making. But I know of a place that
will buy hair and use the oil from the hair follicles to make health
products. I was thinking that if I could find new ways to gather hair,
[]{#ch6.xhtml#page_128 type="pagebreak"}I could sell it to that company
and make enough money to feed my family."

"How do you propose to do that?" asked Payal, the shiest of the five
would-be entrepreneurs.

"I'll gladly give you the hair from my hairbrushes. It does me no good,"
said Damini, offering her support.

"So will I," Kamara chimed in. "And we could get our neighbors to do the
same."

Tanika brightens a little. She feels emboldened enough to offer her
craziest idea: "I was thinking that maybe I could hire people to gather
hair from surrounding neighborhoods," she explained.

"Yes," Sankul agreed, "but how would you pay them?"

"Hire children," Kamara proposed. "You wouldn't have to pay them much,
and surely children can gather hair."

"Toys!" Damini shouted. "Buy a batch of small plastic toys and offer
them to any child who brings you hair. That way you'll get hair for
almost nothing, and the money from your sales will be nearly all
profit."

And with that final addition to her original idea, Tanika had all the
elements of a business plan. Tanika secured a loan of the equivalent of
\$20 USD and immediately bought a bag full of inexpensive plastic toys.
Then, much like an entrepreneurial Santa Claus, Tanika trudged with her
sack of trinkets from village to village.

"I'll let you pick any toy you'd like from the bag if you'll bring me
all the hair in your mother and sisters' hairbrushes," Tanika explained
to the first group of kids she encountered.

When the word got out that hair earned toys, our unlikely entrepreneur
was inundated. Eventually, Tanika sold the hair, repaid her loan, and
had capital left over to expand.

A year has passed, and Tanika now has hundreds of women working for her.
They gather hair in the villages using toys and sell the hair to Tanika,
who then sells it again for a profit. She is a strong, independent
single mother who no longer worries about her family's next meal.

#### []{#ch6.xhtml#page_129 type="pagebreak"}Providing the Influence for Grassroots Entrepreneurship {.h4}

Why was Tanika able to succeed even though hundreds of millions of
people just like her have failed to fight their way out of poverty? Meet
Muhammad Yunus, a Nobel laureate whose leadership opened the door for
Tanika's entrepreneurial brilliance.

After completing his doctorate in economics in the United States in
1972, Yunus decided to return to his homeland of Bangladesh to become a
university professor. As he assumed his comfortable teaching position,
he was horrified to discover that just outside the academic compound,
hundreds of thousands of people were dying of starvation.

![Images](Grenny_0602.jpg)

Muhammad Yunus concluded that poverty is sometimes better solved by
enabling new behavior than by offering charity.

Everywhere he looked he saw people who worked hard but who were still
unable to earn a decent wage. In an attempt to find solutions he
interviewed 42 people from a neighboring village. One after another
reported that the primary barrier they faced to emerging from poverty
was a lack of access to capital.

[]{#ch6.xhtml#page_130 type="pagebreak"}Few in these villages had
traditional jobs because jobs were simply not available. Most,
therefore, were self-employed. If they weren't supported by their own
small plot of land, they were the proprietor of a tiny craft or service
business.

To purchase their inventory or supplies, they needed capital. Usually,
it was just a few pennies. Since none had even this small amount, they
were forced to turn to local loan sharks who charged over 1,000 percent
interest. The interest rate was set at just the point to guarantee that
each entrepreneur would exhaust their income repaying the loan and
forever be locked in a cycle of debt.

For example, Yunus was dumbfounded when he discovered that a woman who
made beautiful handcrafted stools was held in poverty because she lacked
the 5 cents she would need to buy supplies each day. Five cents!

Yunus concluded that if he could help villagers access credit at
reasonable rates and develop habits of successful repayment, he could
improve the financial fortunes of these workers. In total, the 42 people
he interviewed needed a paltry \$27 to finance their businesses.

Yunus turned to local banks and suggested that they offer loans to these
42 laborers at market rates. There were no takers. In fact, bank
executives laughed him out of their offices. As far as they were
concerned, if there was no collateral, there would be no loans!

"Usually when my head touches the pillow, I fall asleep within seconds,"
Yunus told us years later, "But that night I lay in bed ashamed that I
was part of a society which could not provide \$27 to forty-two
able-bodied, hardworking, skilled persons to make a living for
themselves."

Dr. Yunus founded what today is a multibillion-dollar banking and
business conglomerate known as Grameen Bank, which started a revolution
that has given hundreds of millions like Tanika across the world a tool
to improve their prospects. The microcredit group that loaned Tanika the
starting cash she needed in neighboring India was formed as a direct
result of Dr. Yunus's work.

[]{#ch6.xhtml#page_131 type="pagebreak"}What makes this story even more
remarkable is that Dr. Yunus's methods helped not only Tanika but also
her four friends who opened small businesses and succeeded---as do 39
out of every 40 people that Dr. Yunus helps. That's correct---98 percent
of the people to whom Grameen loans money repay their loans in
full---with interest!

But to focus too much on access to capital is to miss part of the
brilliance of Yunus's influence plan. Yunus understood that simply
borrowing and repaying money would not transform a person's life.
Rather, Tanika would have to develop a whole new set of habits to help
her transcend her squalid reality. She would need to learn to speak,
think, and plan in ways starkly different from her past. And she was
less likely to make this dramatic transformation on her own. So Yunus
gave her more than a loan---he gave her a team.

Dr. Yunus didn't merely ask Tanika to submit a business plan that *he*
would review. He required her first to find four friends, each of whom
would submit a plan of her own. Each person from the group would
eventually be granted a loan. And with the granting of a loan, each of
the other four people would cosign for the debt! That meant that Tanika
had to convince her four friends that her business idea would work. She
would have to work with them to create a plan that they would first
coinvent and then support.

What do you suppose happens when people who have never worked a job and
who are currently struggling to afford the basics are being asked to
cosign their new teammate's note in case the business fails? They give
the most committed kind of help possible. They create smart and workable
plans blessed by the full resources of a motivated group.

### HELP HELPS {.h3}

In [Chapter 5](#ch5.xhtml#ch5), we learned that others influence our
motivation in profound ways. Now we add the second of the two social
sources of influence: []{#ch6.xhtml#page_132 type="pagebreak"}*social
ability*. As the Beatles suggested, we're more likely to take on new
behaviors when we have "a little help from our friends." These friends
provide us with access to their brains, give us the strength of their
hands, and even allow us to make use of resources we'd lack without
them. Those around us form the "social capital" of our lives---the human
resources that help us surpass our individual limits.

We're often blind to the degree to which we depend upon the enabling
influence of others. Even the modest individual business savvy of
Tanika's five colleagues, when combined with the deep awareness they had
of local market realities, enabled her to invent a viable business
concept. And the social permission they gave her to step into a more
empowered view of herself enabled her to exceed the limitations of her
culture.

We often overlook the need to provide *social ability* to those we try
to lead because we fail to appreciate the social complexity of human
behavior. Take eating, for example---a behavior it would be easy to
conclude is mediated largely by individual preferences and desires. But
it isn't. Researchers from Cornell University found, for example, that
if you dine with one other person, you'll eat 25 percent more than if
you eat alone. And if you eat with four or more others, you'll eat over
60 percent more than if you eat
alone![^1^](#notes.xhtml#r_ch6notes1){#ch6.xhtml#ch6notes1}

These dramatic differences become obvious when you notice how many
socially enabling behaviors happen in the course of a typical group
lunch. For example, the very fact that five people are eating means the
lunch will take longer. And the longer you eat, the more you eat. When a
fellow diner passes a bread basket around the table, others are far more
likely to select a piece and place it on their plate. If one person
orders a dish that is higher in fat or calories than you'd typically
order, you're more likely to consider it. Coffee? Dessert? I will if you
are. And heaven forbid, the group agrees to split the bill rather than
ask for separate checks! When this happens, research shows that each
person tends to buy (and eat)
more.[^2^](#notes.xhtml#r_ch6notes2){#ch6.xhtml#ch6notes2}

[]{#ch6.xhtml#page_133 type="pagebreak"}Closer to the workplace, let's
say you'd like to influence your team toward more spirited dialogue and
intellectual honesty. You hope that more vigorous engagement will lead
to better decisions and more unified action. You're unlikely to succeed
unless you're willing to play a pivotal enabling role.

For example, when the senior leader in a team meeting resists weighing
in on deliberations until others have fully expressed varying points of
view, greater candor results. Likewise, if the boss is willing to play
devil's advocate---openly acknowledging weaknesses in their own
position---others are more likely to join the conversation. Because
vital behaviors are enacted by individuals and sometimes even done in
private, it's easy to miss the crucial facilitating or debilitating role
others play.

Like Yunus, effective leaders anticipate the many ways people might need
social support as they practice new behaviors. They find ways to
provide:

•   Permission

•   Modeling

•   Help

•   Coaching

We will explore each of these in the following sections.

### PROVIDE PERMISSION {.h3}

Source 4, social ability, is tough to tease apart from source 3, social
motivation. Anytime you provide assistance to someone, you're
simultaneously providing encouragement. You're in essence saying, "I
want you to do this." For example, the very fact that Tanika's group
members are helping her brainstorm a business strategy gives her social
permission to take a larger place in society than her oppressive
marriage and upbringing had previously offered.

[]{#ch6.xhtml#page_134 type="pagebreak"}But there are times when your
leadership must include even more formal permission if you want people
to exceed past social norms. Success might depend on engaging formal
leaders in helping others break unwritten rules that would otherwise
constrain their behavior.

Meet Jess. At this very moment he's sweating like an Olympic boxer.
That's because he's about to tell a lie, and he's afraid he'll get
caught. As Jess starts to speak, his panic makes his throat constrict to
the size of a straw. After faking a coughing seizure, Jess eventually
squeaks out the big, fat lie that's sure to get him in trouble.

"No problem," Jess mutters. "We're right on target."

Jess isn't the only fibber at the table. Everyone in this product
development meeting is stretching the truth. In fact, at the
1,500-person software development group where Jess works, lying about
readiness is so common that Jess and his colleagues have given it a
special name. It's called playing "project chicken."

Here's how the game is played. You say you're ready with your part of a
project when you aren't, in the hope that someone else will admit that
he or she will need to extend the deadline. The first person to lose
nerve and say, "I need more time" is the chicken. And like the vehicular
version of the same game, once someone swerves, everyone else is safe.
All the others are off the hook because they'll benefit from the new
extended deadline, only they didn't have to admit they messed up.

In this particular meeting, most of the team leaders at the table, just
like Jess, are dangerously behind. Yet none of them will admit it. This
time, nobody swerves, the deadline isn't extended, and as a result of
their combined lying, a major product release will soon end in disaster.
When we first started working with this company, it was on the brink of
bankruptcy. It had not met a product release date in years. And when the
company finally did release products, those products typically cost
twice as much as they should have. Morale was at an all-time low, so the
company was losing far too many of its most talented players.

[]{#ch6.xhtml#page_135 type="pagebreak"}Mike, the newly appointed VP of
development, was tasked with turning this situation around. He had
already identified the vital behavior he had to influence. He knew that
if he could find a way to both motivate and enable employees up and down
the organization to speak up early and honestly about problems, the
company would improve morale, reduce costs, and gain control of the
schedule.

When we first met Mike, he had already tried several strategies. He had
offered training, he had identified opinion leaders and asked them to
help influence change, and he had even created an anonymous survey to
measure whether or not behavior was changing. Still, few were stepping
forward. Over time, Mike began to realize that Jess and his colleagues
were not isolated actors. Lying in order to look good had been
reinforced by managers, directors, and vice presidents. It was more than
a habit; it was a norm. And few were changing because few felt they had
true permission to break it.

So Mike looked for a way to get the very managers whose disapproval
employees feared to empower people to share bad news. In a senior staff
meeting he charged every one of his top leaders with teaching the
communication classes that had formerly been taught by professional
trainers. He knew that in a case like this *who* teaches is as important
as *what* is taught.

Every two weeks the manager who had previously sent subtle signals about
suppressing candor taught a two-hour session on how to speak up about
project risks.

In the first two sessions Jess listened passively and cynically. By the
third session he began to consider that his manager's encouragement
might be sincere---so he gave it a shot. He gently raised a risk to a
customer commitment. In the thrall of his training role, his boss
responded in textbook form, acknowledging Jess's integrity and giving
due consideration to the new information.

By the sixth session many of Jess's peers had begun to open up. Within a
matter of months powerful new norms emerged, and Mike's
[]{#ch6.xhtml#page_136 type="pagebreak"}vital behavior of candor under
pressure flourished. Within a year the organization launched two product
releases on time and on budget, and morale was at an all-time high.

When old habits are sustained by formal leaders, formal leaders need to
be part of the solution. Engaging them in teaching roles can be an
effective way of ensuring that people are not just encouraged (source 3)
but enabled (source 4) to adopt new behavior. When leaders teach, they
implicitly extend formal permission to enable others to behave in new
ways.

### PROVIDE MODELING {.h3}

Sometimes people need an example of what a new behavior could look like
in the real world. People need to see people like them putting the
behavior into practice in a way they find credible.

One of the sacrosanct rules at The Other Side Academy is to tell the
truth. Older students tell newer ones that "You stop growing when you
start lying." When you lie you disconnect from authentic connection to
the rest of the house. And connection is your only hope of learning to
live differently in a healthy community.

In spite of all these admonitions, one student, Kade, lied. In his
initial interview he was asked whether he had any history with others in
the house. He chose to withhold the fact that he had both romantic and
criminal connections to three other students. For whatever reason, he
decided the safest path was to fib. He had been doing it his whole life,
so he saw no reason that this moment should be any different.

But six months into his tenure, Kade started to feel differently. One
day he saw one of his closest peers in a yellow shirt. A yellow shirt
means students are on "contract." A contract is a form of discipline for
those who have committed very serious offenses---offenses that violate
the trust of the community. Those on contract work longer hours as a way
of demonstrating their desire to regain others' trust.

[]{#ch6.xhtml#page_137 type="pagebreak"}Kade approached his friend and
asked, "Why are you on contract?"

"I lied in my initial interview," his friend responded. "I'm sick of
being dirty in my life. I came here to do something different. So I
admitted what I did, and now I have a two-week contract."

Kade couldn't sleep that night. The next morning Kade, a thief, a drug
dealer, a junkie, and a liar, decided it was time to become an honest
man. He wore a yellow shirt and endured extra work hours for a month
with pride as he showed his commitment to change.

Kade had carried his secret for months and had intended to carry it
forever, until a persuasive model convinced him to make an enormous
sacrifice to regain his integrity.

#### How Modeling Solved a Corporate Crisis {.h4}

One of the most important reasons to involve opinion leaders (see
[Chapter 5](#ch5.xhtml#ch5)) in your influence efforts is that they make
the most credible models. For example, after careful deliberation, Carol
Bernick, former president of Alberto Culver, a beauty supply company,
concluded that saving the struggling company would require more than a
few new bestselling products. Rather, she needed to engage thousands of
employees in questioning and improving every aspect of the enterprise.

A key to the legendary turnaround of Alberto Culver (before its
acquisition by Unilever) was the pivotal role of 70 carefully identified
opinion leaders from across the enterprise. Bernick spent generous
amounts of time with them over months, listening to their concerns,
soliciting their ideas, and earning their trust. Then she invited any
who were willing to take on the role of growth development leader (GDL)
and tasked them with enabling greater engagement from employees with
whom they had natural influence.

For example, GDLs were often encouraged to bring a colleague of their
choosing to privileged sessions with Bernick. There they'd witness
candid exchanges between GDLs and their president, which taught them
patterns for participation that they carried back to their
teams.[^3^](#notes.xhtml#r_ch6notes3){#ch6.xhtml#ch6notes3}

#### []{#ch6.xhtml#page_138 type="pagebreak"}Saving Lives with Peer Help {.h4}

Influential models have been the key to saving lives in Hope Squad, a
peer-to-peer suicide prevention program. Greg Hudnall, a former public
school principal, dedicated his life to saving lives after losing some
of his students to suicide. The breaking point came when a fourth grader
at a local elementary school committed suicide---at a park next to the
school. The day of the tragedy was endless. At 1:30 a.m., after
agonizing hours with police, students, teachers, and the grief-stricken
family, Dr. Hudnall returned to his car and sobbed inconsolably until a
resolve settled in his soul that has guided his life ever since: "I will
do everything I can to prevent any other child from taking their
life."[^4^](#notes.xhtml#r_ch6notes4){#ch6.xhtml#ch6notes4}

Years later, there are Hope Squads in 1,600+ schools across 43 US
states, Canada, and other countries. One of the drivers behind how these
squads work is that parents and teachers are sometimes the last to know
when a child is at risk. Thus, change must engage kids themselves. Dr.
Hudnall's first goal was to foster a vital behavior where peer students
practiced QPR:

•   *Question* (open a conversation when you see signals of concern),

•   *Persuade* (urge those at risk to get help), and

•   *Refer* (proactively connect them with resources).

![Images](Grenny_0603.jpg)

Hope Squads fight student suicide by engaging student opinion leaders.

[]{#ch6.xhtml#page_139 type="pagebreak"}To get this model to work,
Hudnall first identified opinion leaders. He asked students across the
school for the names of those they'd turn to if they needed help or a
listening ear. Those who were identified most frequently by peers were
invited to participate in the Hope Squad and receive special training.

Today a lifesaving army of 45,000 student leaders are charged with
modeling suicide prevention habits for other students. For example, one
Hope Squad student noticed that another student was having a tough day.
He didn't even know the boy, but he could tell something was off. He
called the boy after school and invited him to the mall with him and
some friends so he could create an opportunity to question him a bit.
After some initial hesitation, the boy admitted he had gone home and
loaded his father's gun, preparing to use it on himself. While they were
at the mall, the boy's father returned home, discovered the loaded gun
sitting on a table, and intervened to get his son needed help. The boy
is alive and doing well today.

The remarkable influence of these peer models of caring intervention has
resulted in thousands of kids getting timely help, including many who
benefited from hospital admission prior to carrying out plans for
self-harm.

In most communities, culture changes only as fast as opinion leaders
model new behaviors.

### PROVIDE HELP {.h3}

Sometimes people need more than a model or simple permission---they need
specific help. It might be a tool, some resource, the right information,
or even a hand.

We travel next to South Africa to study the work of Garth Japhet. Dr.
Japhet began his career as a medical doctor, then wound a circuitous
path to spend 16 years as the CEO of Soul City, a South African
nonprofit working to stop violence against women. In South Africa, as in
[]{#ch6.xhtml#page_140 type="pagebreak"}far too much of the world,
violence against women is endemic. One in nine women will be raped at
least once in her lifetime. One in five will be physically or
emotionally abused by her partner.

One of Dr. Japhet's most crucial insights was that such violence is
systemic. It isn't simply about an out-of-control domestic partner
making isolated decisions in the privacy of a home. It is a habit that
is socially sustained by legal authorities, parents, peers, neighbors,
clergy, and scores of others. The behavior is modeled, enabled, taught,
and reinforced in profound ways. Therefore, changing it required immense
social intervention as well. If *everyone* is sustaining the problem,
*everyone* will likewise be required to enable change.

Japhet also understood that many in South African society disapproved of
the abuse---both women and men. And yet these people felt unable to
exert sufficient influence to change the behavior they despised. For
example, Japhet suspected there were thousands of moments when neighbors
would witness or overhear awful episodes of abuse, but felt paralyzed in
inaction for lack of a safe and effective way of intervening. So Japhet
transformed a common household item into a tool for social change. In
his own words:

*On the TV program Soul City, we purposely created a well-respected
teacher, Thabang, who repeatedly abused his likable wife, Matlakala.
Viewers---both male and female---quickly concluded that Matlakala didn't
deserve the abuse as tradition had often indicated. She was pleasant,
easy to get along with, and nothing more than an innocent victim.
Equally curious, Thabang was mostly a reasonable and good person---much
like themselves.*

[]{#ch6.xhtml#page_141 type="pagebreak"}In one episode neighbors hear
Thabang beating poor Matlakala, and they can take it no longer, so they
decide to let Thabang know that his actions aren't going unobserved. But
how could they let Thabang know without being too intrusive? How could
they do it without putting themselves at physical risk?

In the crucial episode, neighbors gather outside Thabang's front door
and bang pots and pans. They don't say a word; they just bang pots and
pans. Thabang becomes embarrassed and runs from his own house. In future
episodes, we see his reluctance to face a repeat of the humiliating
night. Instead, he looks for better outlets for his feelings of
impotence and rage.

![Images](Grenny_0604.jpg)

Garth Japhet created a novel way neighbors could help spouses in the act
of being abused.

Following this episode, people in townships across South Africa, upon
hearing the sounds of spousal abuse next door, began to stand in front
of their neighbors' homes and bang pots and pans. What they had lacked
was not motivation to intervene, they needed the ability. They needed a
tool. Sensing that, Japhet avoided piling on more lectures and instead
offered a tool. He enabled them to practice a new behavior.

::: {.sidebar}
[]{#ch6.xhtml#page_142 type="pagebreak"}**Act Like an Influencer**

When Rich Sheridan of Menlo Software decided to redesign how his
employees create software (from top to bottom), he wanted to make sure
that individuals didn't feel alone, isolated, or cut off---or like the
sole possessors of certain knowledge, which would make them
indispensable and unable to take vacations. So Rich put code writers in
teams of two---sharing one computer.

At first, this cramped everyone's style. Everyone wanted to sit in the
driver's seat and write their own code. Soon the teams found that with
one person typing and one co-designing and watching, they caught errors
early on---cutting their time on fixing errors (something everyone
hates) from 40 percent of their working time to no time at all. They
also reduced "knowledge silos," situations in which only one person knew
what was going on.

Now there were two or more experts working on every job. "Since then,
we've never had to turn down a vacation request," Rich explains. By
creating interdependent pairs (meaning everyone has someone to lean on),
just about every measure has improved---including morale.
:::

At Spectrum Healthcare, the provision of help came in the form of Purple
People. The day doctors and nurses were instructed to begin using a new
electronic medical records system, many felt anxious. The new initiative
would fail if harried doctors who were not direct employees of Spectrum
Healthcare hospitals elected to use sticky notes and scratch pads rather
than stepping up to the keyboard.

Once again, wise leaders refused to simply pile on more reasons for
complying (You'll save lives! You'll save time!). Instead, they trained
[]{#ch6.xhtml#page_143 type="pagebreak"}opinion leaders from throughout
the organization to give support for the most common struggles. During
the first week the new system was implemented, these opinion leaders all
wore purple T-shirts emblazoned with the title "Purple People."
Employees and doctors were instructed to find a purple person at the
first sign of trouble. The release went flawlessly, with 98 percent
compliance within 48 hours.

Among all the leaders we have studied, those who faced the biggest risks
also worked the hardest to provide assistance to influence change during
crucial moments.

All of us have behaviors we struggle to change, then relapse into past
practices. Arranging for help from others is not a sign of weakness, but
an admission of reality. We often can't do it alone.

### PROVIDE COACHING {.h3}

Shakespeare once said, "For the eye sees not itself / But by reflection,
by some other things." Sometimes as people struggle to adopt new
behaviors, the first assistance they need is a more accurate view of
themselves. Next, they need help figuring out how to properly practice
new and better habits. In other words, they need coaching.

We once worked with Lauren, an aspiring executive who had been told she
needed to "lean in" more at work. Her boss told her that she was
brilliant but invisible. She took the challenge and began speaking up
more in meetings and volunteering occasionally to present ideas. And the
more she leaned in, the more her credibility plummeted. She wasn't a
very persuasive or effective public speaker. To put it bluntly, she had
an uncanny ability to whip a crowd into a nap.

This all changed with two pieces of advice from an insightful friend.
Lauren knew what she wanted, but she didn't know what it looked like. So
she enlisted a coworker to give her some coaching. After watching her
carefully in multiple settings, her colleague told her, "Pick up the
speed by 10 percent. And always start with your conclusion."

[]{#ch6.xhtml#page_144 type="pagebreak"}It was hard to hear the truth
about how she came across (slow and disorganized). But the instant
Lauren put the coaching into practice, she could read the difference in
the alertness and engagement of her audiences. Her influence increased
and her comfort in social settings soared.

What Lauren needed to change was not more motivation; she needed a
coach.

::: {.sidebar}
**Act Like an Influencer**

David Levin and his colleagues at KIPP schools don't just want to help
their 125,000 at-risk children get to college. They want to influence
them in such a way that they graduate---opening otherwise unimaginable
futures. For years KIPP's 33 percent college graduation rate appeared to
be a marvel when compared with an 8.3 percent likelihood for similar
kids who didn't go to a KIPP school. Then Levin's team replaced expert
school counselors with what they call "Near Peers." Near Peers are
former KIPP-sters freshly graduated from college. KIPP offers them the
chance to work for a maximum of two years helping kids a few years
behind them traverse the hazards of early college life. The shift from
experts to opinion leaders has produced remarkable improvements---with
45 percent of KIPP alumni who graduate from high school now completing a
four-year degree. Near Peers don't just give encouragement, they give
hard-earned advice for dealing with breakups, stretching food dollars,
and choosing classes.
:::

#### Coaching in Thailand {.h4}

One influential leader is credited with saving over five million lives,
in part because of his wisdom in providing real-time coaches. When Dr.
[]{#ch6.xhtml#page_145 type="pagebreak"}Wiwat Rojanapithayakorn came on
the scene in the Ratchaburi province of Thailand in the early 1980s, the
AIDS epidemic was raging out of control. As a middle manager in the
health ministry at the time, he recognized that if things didn't change,
the death rate in Thailand would soon eclipse that of anywhere else in
the world.

He also realized that given there were no vaccines or even effective
treatments at the time, the only hope of saving lives was to treat the
crisis as a social science problem, not a medical science one. In other
words, by influencing behavior.

Dr. Wiwat went to work using every principle we've outlined so far.
First, he ensured that the goal was clear: *Halt the spread of AIDS*.

He worked hard to establish credible measures of infections and deaths
across his province. Next, he studied the vital behaviors that would be
key to saving lives. It was soon clear that the primary path of new
infections nationwide was the sex trade.

In a country where the majority of Thai men were at least occasional
clients of the sex trade, the virus that causes AIDS was not confined to
subgroups like IV drug users sharing needles or single people with
multiple sex partners. Instead, it was following husbands and life
partners back to many homes and families in the country.

Through rigorous study, Dr. Wiwat zeroed in on a crucial moment that
held the key to success. A typical scenario looks like this: Achara, a
tragically young woman, is exploited to offer sex services by the owner
of a go-go bar in a seedy area of town. A foreign tourist takes an
interest in Achara and negotiates for her services. In passing, during
the price discussion, she mentions that he will be required to use a
condom. He flushes red and demands that she back down. She makes a
nervous attempt to hold her ground. At this point, she realizes the
brothel owner is following the conversation. He tersely shakes his head
at her. Achara begins to relent. The tourist offers a substantial tip.
Achara has a life-or-death decision to make.

[]{#ch6.xhtml#page_146 type="pagebreak"}Dr. Wiwat realized that success
meant finding a way to influence the outcome of hundreds of thousands of
moments just like this one in thousands of dark corners of Thailand
every single day. If he failed, young women like Achara, and the many
who contracted the virus through them, would continue to die.

As part of Wiwat's influence plan, he got Achara and other workers the
coaching and the authority they would need to practice the vital
behavior. "Women in these circumstances," he told us, "are at an
overwhelming power disadvantage. If we don't address that, they can't
protect themselves."

So Wiwat invited brothel owners to attend a meeting in a hotel ballroom.
Many were nervous at first about attending such a public gathering. He
ensured they were properly motivated to show up by explaining that their
choice was to either attend or be shut down by the police for 30 days.
They all showed up.

The meeting agenda was simple, brief, and straightforward. Neither
condoning nor condemning their work, he simply urged them to show
greater concern for the health and well-being of their workers by
complying with 100 percent condom use from today forward. He reasoned
that demanding safety would not cause a loss of customers to competitors
if all held firm on the same requirements. All nodded obediently.

Wiwat then added that "mystery shoppers" from the health ministry would
be routinely visiting their establishments and attempting to secure
services without condom use. Should any employee fail to demand condom
use, the brothel would be shut down for 30 days. The nodding seemed more
vigorous. Wiwat's hope was that this intervention would motivate owners
to give sex workers the authority to decline unprotected sex services.

He next set to work on solving an even more difficult
problem---empowering teenage girls to hold boundaries with sexually
aroused and inebriated customers---often customers who would take
[]{#ch6.xhtml#page_147 type="pagebreak"}offense at being told no by a
woman. Step one was to engage former sex workers who knew how to handle
these moments to teach workshops to younger girls. The workshop leaders
identified those within each brothel who were more skillful at resisting
pressure. They enlisted their commitment to provide coaching and backup
to less confident workers when the pressure was on. Participants engaged
in deliberate practice of these confrontations with the very coworkers
who would be around them when the going got tough. Furthermore, they
knew who they could turn to in a crisis if they needed help.

The results were striking. Within days condom use became the norm,
increasing from 14 percent before the intervention to 90 percent
immediately following. And as expected, the number of new AIDS
infections declined precipitously---ultimately decreasing by 88 percent
within a couple of years.

While it's impossible to determine the names of those whose lives were
saved, we know that an entire nation was blessed by a leader who
understood the intricacies of influence.

### THE POWER OF SOCIAL CONNECTIONS {.h3}

The difference between success and failure in health, career, business,
and life often comes down to the enabling role of others. Patterns of
poverty or prosperity, for example, are not just about individual
capability. They are enabled or inhibited by the kind of mentoring,
guidance, and connections an individual is given early on.

Look at the profusion of online communities these days to provide mental
health counseling, life coaching, addiction recovery support, knitting
advice, and even culinary insect preparation. Tom Boyle of British
Telecom coined the expression *network quotient* (NQ) to highlight the
importance of a person's ability to form connections with others. He
argues that from a career standpoint a person's NQ is now more important
than their intelligence quotient (IQ).

[]{#ch6.xhtml#page_148 type="pagebreak"}The behaviors we form depend
upon the people around us. The most effective leaders ensure that social
enabling is built into every attempt to influence positive change.

### SUMMARY: SOCIAL ABILITY {.h3}

Bad behavior is often sustained by a complex network of other
people---those who model, coach, and demand compliance with old norms.
Effective leaders recognize this and take steps to ensure those they
want to influence have the social support they need to break free of old
constraints. Specifically, they build plans to provide:

**1.**   **Social permission.** Those with formal or informal authority
must overtly enable behavior that might have been taboo in the past.

**2.**   **Modeling.** If a picture is worth a thousand words, a live
model who shows what vital behaviors look like in action is worth
millions.

**3.**   **Help.** Help is needed when people haven't yet mastered the
new behavior.

**4.**   **Real-time coaching to lift others to the next level.**
Learning is accelerated when coaching immediately follows an initial
attempt at new behavior.

Influential leaders understand that social ability is crucial to any
effort to make change inevitable.

::: {.sidebar}
[]{#ch6.xhtml#page_149 type="pagebreak"}We depend on assistance from
those around us when attempting to form new behaviors. The most
effective leaders make sure to grant permission, model the correct
behaviors, extend help when needed, and provide real-time coaching to
those they are leading.
:::

[]{#ch7a.xhtml}

[]{#ch7a.xhtml#page_150 type="pagebreak"}![Images](Grenny_0701.jpg)

[]{#ch7.xhtml}

[]{#ch7.xhtml#page_151 type="pagebreak"}7 {#ch7.xhtml#ch7 .h2n}
-----------------------------------------

REWARD WITH CARE {.h2ta}
----------------

*Source 5: Structural Motivation*

*Even small rewards can help people make remarkable change.*

So far, we've explored both personal and social influence. Now we step
away from human factors and examine source 5, *structural motivation*:
how to optimize the power of *things* such as rewards, perks, bonuses,
salaries, and the occasional boot in the rear. Most leaders need no
convincing to align rewards with vital behaviors. They fully believe
that incentives change behavior. So our advice here may surprise you.

Your goal with structural motivation should not be to overwhelm people
to change. Rather, it should be primarily to remove *dis*incentives---to
"change the economy" as it were.

Most leaders run the risk of relying too much on incentives. But if bad
behavior is deeply entrenched, odds are that the current system
[]{#ch7.xhtml#page_152 type="pagebreak"}is positively encouraging the
exact behaviors you don't want. Changing the economy means ensuring that
positive and negative incentives aren't undermining the influence
message you're trying to send. But the real work of motivating change
shouldn't be done with incentives. Sources 1 (personal motivation) and 3
(social motivation) should do the heavy lifting.

### USE EXTRINSIC REWARDS THIRD {.h3}

Stories of well-intended rewards that inadvertently backfire are legion.
One hospital, for example, found that anesthesiologists who were paid
based only on the work they did with their own patients were less
willing to jump in and help one another when someone else's patient was
reacting badly.

Consider some attempts by the former Soviet Union to dabble in incentive
schemes. In the energy sector, rubles were being thrown away in the
search for oil reserves because Soviet workers received bonuses
according to the number of feet they drilled. It turns out that it's far
easier to drill many shallow holes than to drill a few deeper ones.
Instead of following the geological advisories to drill deep to find
existing reserves, workers were happy merely poking the surface over and
over---turning up very little oil. After all, it's what they were
rewarded for doing.[^1^](#notes.xhtml#r_ch7notes1){#ch7.xhtml#ch7notes1}

An executive we know decided that her employees weren't as innovative as
they needed to be, so she instituted a simple suggestion program.
Employees were encouraged to find ways to bring in more revenue or
reduce costs---with the promise of bonuses and prizes for validated
contributions. Employees were *less* rather than *more* inclined to
offer improvement ideas with the bonus attached. Previously they'd
occasionally offer ideas out of the simple desire to improve work life.
But now, the only proposals they put time into developing were those
that []{#ch7.xhtml#page_153 type="pagebreak"}might get them a
substantial payout. The net effect was less improvement and more
negotiation over who got paid what for the big ideas.

The primary cause of most of these debacles is that individuals attempt
to influence change by using rewards as their *first* motivational
strategy. When it comes to *motivating* change, effective leaders use
rewards *third.* They first ensure that vital behaviors are given the
proper moral frame. The best reason for people to adopt new behaviors is
because they feel right, good, or meaningful. They're *personally
motivating*.

Next, they line up social support. They ensure that formal and informal
leaders are doing their best to turn the new behaviors into new social
norms. Only then do they examine the influence of structured rewards or
sanctions.

When people aren't doing the right things for the right reasons, piling
on "carrots and sticks" is more likely to create unintended
consequences.

For example, in a classic experiment from 1973, Dr. Mark
Lepper[^2^](#notes.xhtml#r_ch7notes2){#ch7.xhtml#ch7notes2} found that
kids who were rewarded for doing something they already enjoyed began to
enjoy the activity less. Researchers watched small children playing with
toys in a nursery to determine which toy they preferred. They next told
them they would be given a favorite snack each time they played with
that toy. No surprise, the kids played with the toy more. At least while
the snacks were in play. When the reward was removed, kids played with
their previously favorite toy *much less*!

Dr. Lepper revealed that rewarding people for engaging in an activity
that is already satisfying may work against you. Think of the
implications. You want your daughter to learn to love reading with the
same joy you have. You notice that she's starting to pick up the
behavior on her own, so you decide to reinforce it. To encourage her,
you create an incentive program. Every time she picks out a book on her
own and reads it, you give her \$5. She loves the plan and starts
reading []{#ch7.xhtml#page_154 type="pagebreak"}more, and she spends her
earnings on a new video game. It's not long until she's able to buy
several games.

After a while, you think that you've rewarded reading enough and that it
has become its own reward. So you drop the incentive. Surely your
encouragement has helped your daughter learn to love reading good books
even more.

But your plan backfires. The minute you stop paying your daughter for
reading, she turns to her games and reads less than she did before you
offered incentives. Apparently she has learned to earn money to purchase
games, and the incentive you tried didn't leave the impression you
wanted. She's just like those nursery school kids.

The explanation for this phenomenon became known as "the
overjustification effect." If people already enjoy something, incentives
can crowd out the intrinsic pleasure they receive. People begin to
attribute their engagement as a response to the incentive rather than
the pleasure---like professional athletes whose colossal salary causes
them to lose their initial love of the game itself. Once the reward is
removed, the person believes that the activity isn't as much fun as he
or she judged earlier, so he or she does it less often.

Remember what we learned from source 1, personal motivation: *How you
frame is how you feel.* The sources of motivation a leader relies on can
influence how others frame the activity. If the leader frames an
activity as a moral good or a pleasurable pursuit, they encourage others
to connect to deep and sustainable reasons for engaging in the activity.
If they frame it as socially desirable, they are similarly likely to
engage. But overreliance on incentives can cause people to lose
connection with their previous moral and social motivations.

For example, frustrated leaders in an Israeli daycare center attempted
to use incentives to foster more conscientious behavior from parents.
Parents were expected to pick up their children promptly at 3:30 p.m.
when daycare services were scheduled to end. Many would arrive 5, 10, or
even 15 minutes late, an inconsiderate inconvenience to
[]{#ch7.xhtml#page_155 type="pagebreak"}the staff. One day the staff
announced that going forward, tardy parents would be charged \$5 for
every 30 minutes they arrived past 3:30 pm. What would you predict
happened? And more importantly, why?

What had been a relative handful of outliers suddenly became the norm.
Far *more* parents began showing up late. Why? Because leaders had
changed the frame. Previously, parents saw their pickup time as a moral
(I made a promise to be there at 3:30 p.m.) or a social (I don't want
staff to be mad at me) issue. By assigning a price, they inadvertently
turned it into an economic calculation (\$5 for 30 minutes of
high-quality babysitting? You can have little Judith for the whole
weekend!).

Using incentives third will serve you well even in moments of
spontaneous influence. Think back to our coauthor whose son was detained
by police for throwing water balloons at cars. He retrieves his son from
the police station and begins the silent ride home. When Dad finally
breaks the silence, the first words out of his mouth will reveal the way
Dad frames his son's delinquency. If Dad starts with, "You're in big
trouble now!" he has framed it economically (source 5). Dad is
suggesting that Brian should regret his behavior because it's leading to
extrinsic consequences. If he begins with, "You've embarrassed our
family!" he has framed it socially (source 3). It's about reputation,
respect, and social sanction. Fortunately, in this situation, Dad chose
to offer a moral frame: "Imagine you're driving a car and suddenly a big
hard object slams into your windshield. Maybe even cracks it. How would
that feel?" He encouraged his son to empathize with the driver of the
vehicle they targeted (source 1).

This sensitivity was on display in a March 2020 press conference with
then-governor Jay Inslee of Washington state. Early in the Covid-19
pandemic, Washington, and many other regions of the world, announced
mandatory shelter-in-place and mask policies. As Inslee explained the
new policies, a reporter asked Inslee, "What are the penalties for not
abiding by the ban?" Inslee could have referred to potential fines or
incarceration (source 5). But he didn't. He understood that the
[]{#ch7.xhtml#page_156 type="pagebreak"}only sustainable motivations for
change would have to be moral and social. He answered, "The penalties
are you might be killing your granddad if you don't do it. And I'm
serious about this. The principle . . . is for people to understand the
consequences of community responsibility."

Jay Inslee resisted the temptation to turn a moral choice into an
economic one.

The bottom line is not that incentives don't matter. They do. But if not
combined with clear moral and social messaging, they are more likely to
cause distracting chaos than positive change.

::: {.sidebar}
**Act Like an Influencer**

We asked our hospitality expert, Danny Meyer, how he uses incentives to
motivate great customer service. "We don't do much with incentives," he
concluded. "Well, we pool all tips, but lots of places do that. We
believe that creating exceptional customer experiences requires an
entire team. So tips are a reflection not just of one person's
effort---but the whole team's. However, people don't serve customers
just to get tips. They do it because they enjoy it and because they're
part of a great culture that promotes it." Danny shows us that the heavy
lifting of leadership is done by sources 1 and 3. His goal is to ensure
source 5 is simply aligned with the results and behaviors he wants.
:::

### USE INCENTIVES WISELY {.h3}

Effective leaders do eventually use rewards and punishments. For
instance, if you don't repay a loan to Muhammad Yunus's Grameen Bank,
your borrower group has to pay it back for you. And remember, they know
where you live!

[]{#ch7.xhtml#page_157 type="pagebreak"}When Dr. Wiwat wanted the
attention of brothel owners in his AIDS campaign, he let them know there
would be legal consequences if they failed to protect their workers. And
if a person in a rural African village calls out her neighbor who is not
properly filtering water for Guinea worm larvae, village leaders reward
her with an attractive T-shirt (emblazoned with a Guinea worm disease
eradication logo).

Incentives help. So, the question is, how do you use them wisely?

First, as we learned, make sure they don't overwhelm other intrinsic and
social motivators. Let's look at three other guidelines for implementing
incentives effectively:

•   Think small.

•   Reward behavior, not just results.

•   Punish sparingly.

#### Think Small {.h4}

You don't need to go overboard with big gestures and pricey incentives.
Even small rewards can help people make remarkable changes. For example,
Johns Hopkins Hospital completed a study of alcoholics who had been
admitted to the hospital to, of all things, drink alcohol---but only in
moderate quantities. The idea of the project was to help those who
struggle with alcoholism achieve moderation rather than abstinence.

To influence patients' behavior, each day staff members determined
residential privileges on the basis of how much alcohol the patients
consumed. If they drank too much, they were given pureed food instead of
the normal offering. Their amount of consumption also affected phone
privileges, visiting hours, and so on. When compared to control patients
who were simply told how much to drink with no incentives, experimental
subjects were 60 percent more likely to reach their target consumption
level.

If you find it hard to believe that simple incentives can help patients
break free from the grip of alcoholism, you'll be amazed to find
[]{#ch7.xhtml#page_158 type="pagebreak"}they help with something as
addictive as cocaine. Dr. Stephen Higgins, professor of psychology and
psychiatry and director of Vermont Center on Behavior and Health,
developed a method of rewards as incentives for outpatient rehab
programs.[^3^](#notes.xhtml#r_ch7notes3){#ch7.xhtml#ch7notes3} In the
programs, participants must submit a urine sample three times a week.
Higgins's strategy said that if all three samples tested negative,
subjects received a bonus voucher that they could exchange for goods and
services provided by the research staff.

Even Higgins was surprised to find that "a stack of vouchers can
outweigh the powerful urge to use cocaine."

Obviously, vouchers alone wouldn't be enough to keep cocaine addicts
clean. All six sources of influence are required for lasting change.
However, when used with other sources of influence, 90 percent of those
who were also given incentives finished the 12-week treatment program,
whereas only 65 percent of non-voucher subjects completed the program.
The long-term effects were similarly impressive.

To show how small incentives can be powerful motivators for almost
anyone, take a look at your luggage. If you're like millions of other
travelers around the world, you sport a shiny tag displaying your
frequent flyer status like it's a Nobel Prize. It's almost embarrassing
to acknowledge the way these programs have reshaped our behavior. In the
early days of these programs ambitious status-seekers would take useless
flights at the end of the year just to ensure they "qualified" for the
next higher ranking. Today since you can accumulate points for any
purchases, it's not uncommon for people to funnel everything they can
think of through their frequent flyer associated credit card to ensure
they get points and status. Do we respond to incentives? Yes! In fact,
travelers have become so obsessed with maximizing their miles that the
dollar value of unused frequent flyer miles on the planet now exceeds
all the cash circulating in the US economy.

It's important to add that there is often much more going on with some
incentives than their economic value alone. For example, when
[]{#ch7.xhtml#page_159 type="pagebreak"}staff in a cocaine recovery
program hand out a voucher, some recipients will experience intrinsic (I
accomplished something!) and social motivation (the staff respect me). A
frequent flyer luggage tag is about social status signaling (Look
everyone, I'm a Titanium Albatross!) as much as a path to free travel.
And that's the point. Well-implemented incentives don't need to be big,
because they're used as vehicles for all three sources of motivation,
not just one.

For example, we saw how a well-packaged brass goose could light a fire
in hundreds of highly paid executives. A consulting firm in the United
States decided to offer awards for top execs who completed training
assignments. The plan was simple. Senior leaders would meet weekly in a
world-acclaimed training program where they would be given specific
behavioral goals to ensure they practiced what they were learning. The
leaders would then report back to their trainer when they had fulfilled
their commitment. Each completed assignment earned them points. When
they received a threshold number of points, they were publicly presented
with a 10-inch-tall brass goose with a retail value of \$10.

Leaders read lengthy books, wrote up case studies, filled out forms, and
moved heaven and earth to be sure they made it to the trainer by the
cutoff time.

It wasn't the cash value of the reward that mattered. It was the
symbolic message that motivated behavior. It was the moral and social
motivation that gave the token award value.

The Other Side Academy makes impressive use of modest rewards as well.
Students quickly learn that with each new accomplishment they receive
new privileges. They move from grunt work to increasingly complicated
and interesting jobs. As a reward, they get to replace their red
freshman shirt with a green sophomore shirt. If they stick with it, they
get the blue junior shirt and eventually a coveted black senior shirt.
Ultimately students are given \$50 per month in "walking-around money"
(WAM)---and the privilege of leaving the campus to use it.
[]{#ch7.xhtml#page_160 type="pagebreak"}These seemingly small incentives
are a big deal, and students are as proud of their new shirts as they
are of the promotion that came with it.

![Images](Grenny_0702.jpg)

Shirt colors at The Other Side Academy offer powerful motivation.

We can't resist sharing one more example of modest rewards exerting
outsized influence. In a group home for troubled teenage girls,
administrators noted an alarming trend. Suicide attempts among residents
had increased dramatically. After administrators tried everything from
giving emotional speeches, to holding group sessions, to enlisting the
help of friends and family---all to no avail---they came up with, of all
things, an incentive: If a resident attempted suicide, she would be
denied TV privileges for the next week. Suicide attempts dropped to
zero.

Without going into the complex psychology of suicide attempts versus
suicide gestures and then missing the point of the example, suffice it
to say that small incentives that are immediately linked to vital
behaviors can yield amazing results with some of the world's most
difficult problems. Rewards should be as large as necessary, but no
larger, []{#ch7.xhtml#page_161 type="pagebreak"}or you risk crowding out
the intrinsic (source 1) or social (source 3) motivation they carry with
a flashy economic lure (source 5).

::: {.sidebar}
**Act Like an Influencer**

One open-pit mine used simple incentives to boost safe driving
practices. The giant trucks used on-site were equipped with GPS systems
that measured speed, acceleration, and braking in order to hold drivers
accountable for bad behavior. Terrible things had happened in the mine
in the past when drivers failed to drive carefully. The new tracking
systems gathered data that was combined to create "risky driving scores"
for every driver each day. The drivers were grouped into five-person
teams. A team's score consisted of whatever the worst score was for a
driver on their team.

Teams with the best scores won small weekly prizes---caps, T-shirts, and
coffee mugs. These prizes were emblazoned with "Master Driver" logos.
Driving safety improved markedly and rapidly following the introduction
of this simple way to keep score and reward achievement.

This highly successful incentive system tapped into both personal pride
(source 1) and peer pressure (source 3). It used small rewards (source
5) in combination with other sources to promote positive change.
:::

#### Reward Behavior, Not Just Results {.h4}

Rewards can be helpful early in a leadership effort when it might be a
while before new behavior leads to starkly improved results. In such
situations, it's wise to recognize and reward small improvements in
behavior along the way.

[]{#ch7.xhtml#page_162 type="pagebreak"}As simple as this sounds, we're
bad at it---especially at work. When polled, employees reveal their
number one complaint is that they aren't recognized for their
contributions. It seems that people hand out praise as if it were being
rationed, usually only for outstanding work. Make a small improvement,
and it's highly unlikely that anyone will say or do anything. Each year
a new survey publishes the fact that employees would appreciate more
praise, and each year we apparently do nothing different.

This is odd in light of the fact that humans are actually quite good at
rewarding incremental achievement with their small children. A child
makes a sound that approximates "Mama," and members of the immediate
family screech in joy, call every single living relative with the
breaking news, ask the kid to perform on cue, and then celebrate each
new pronouncement with the same enthusiasm you expect they'd display had
they trained a newborn to recite "If" by Rudyard Kipling.

However, this ability to see and reward small improvements wanes over
time until one day it takes a call from a Nobel Committee to raise an
eyebrow. Eventually kids grow up and go to work where apparently the
words *good* and *job* aren't allowed to be used in combination, or so
suggest employee surveys. There seems to be a permanent divide between
researchers and scholars who heartily argue that performance is best
enhanced by rewarding incremental improvements, and the rest of the
world where people wait for a profound achievement before working up any
enthusiasm.

Influential leaders find ways to reward sincere efforts to apply vital
behaviors---even when the results are modest. For example, in the
groundbreaking book *Kaizen* that inspired a global quality movement,
author Masaaki Imai highlights the importance of rewarding effort and
not outcome.[^4^](#notes.xhtml#r_ch7notes4){#ch7.xhtml#ch7notes4} Imai
tells the story of a group of servers whose job it was to serve tea
during lunch at one of Matsushita's plants. The servers noted that the
employees sat in predictable locations and drank a predictable amount of
tea. Rather than put a full container at each place,
[]{#ch7.xhtml#page_163 type="pagebreak"}they calculated the optimum
amount of tea to be poured at each table, thus reducing tea leaf
consumption by half.

How much did the suggestion save? Only a small sum. Yet the group was
given the company's presidential gold medal. Other suggestions saved
more money (by an astronomical amount), but this modest proposal
captured what the judges thought was the best implementation of vital
behaviors. They rewarded the process, knowing that if you reward the
actual steps people follow, eventually results take care of themselves.

The behavior you reward will drive the behavior you get. Watch coaches
as they speak about the importance of teamwork and then celebrate
individual accomplishment. Kids quickly learn that it's the score that
counts, not the assist, so they stop playing as a team and play to steal
the spotlight instead. Or consider the family who unwittingly enable a
loved one's addiction. Their words may say, "You should really stop
taking drugs," but their actions say, "As long as you're taking them,
we'll give you free rent, use of our cars, and bail whenever you need
it." They're rewarding the very behavior they claim to want to change.

For years US politicians wrung their hands over the fact that Americans
save so little money. For a time they looked jealously across the ocean
at Japanese citizens, who save money at many times the rate of
Americans. Some analysts speculated there was just something different
about Japanese character. Perhaps they were more willing to sacrifice.
But then again, maybe the difference could be attributed in part to
incentives. For example, in the United States interest earned on savings
is taxable. For many years in Japan it wasn't. In the United States
during that same time period, interest on consumer debt, like that from
credit cards and home loans, was tax deductible. In Japan it wasn't.
Maybe we were more alike than we thought.

So take heed. When behaviors are out of whack, look closely at your
rewards. Who knows? Your own incentive system may be causing the
problem.

::: {.sidebar}
[]{#ch7.xhtml#page_164 type="pagebreak"}**Act Like an Influencer**

A consulting firm asked us to discover why many of its best consultants
were leaving. The day we began our work, we were invited to their annual
awards luncheon, which happened to be held that same day. The luncheon
recognized the "Road Warrior of the Year" with a cash prize. This Road
Warrior was the consultant who had spent the most days on the road that
year, earning the greatest number of consulting days for the firm.

The winner bounded to the stage, grabbed the oversize check he'd won,
and announced he'd use it to buy a high-end Porsche. This reward was
plenty motivating, but here was the problem: for four years in a row,
these "winners" quit the firm the same year they won the prize---citing
work-life balance issues.

The company wanted consultants to stay and grow their careers with them,
but they were rewarding behavior that encouraged an unhappy work life.
:::

#### Discipline Sparingly {.h4}

Sometimes you don't have the luxury of rewarding positive performance
because the person you'd like to reward never actually does the right
thing. In fact, he or she does only the wrong thing---and often. In
these cases, if you want to make use of extrinsic reinforcers, you're
left with the prospect of disciplining this person. Fortunately, since
discipline is from the same family as positive reinforcement, it should
have a similar effect. Right?

Maybe not. In hundreds of experiments with laboratory animals and
humans, researchers found that punishment decreases the likelihood of a
previously reinforced response, but only temporarily. Plus it can
produce other undesired effects.

[]{#ch7.xhtml#page_165 type="pagebreak"}You might gain compliance, but
only over the short term. The person in question may actually push back
or purposely rebel. And there's a good chance that this person will
resent the punishment, thereby putting your relationship at risk.

The goal with discipline is to use only as much as necessary. Some of
the most motivating effects of discipline come from anticipation, not
the consequence itself. Whenever possible, provide a clear warning to
let people know exactly what negative things *will* happen to them if
they continue down their current path, but don't actually administer
discipline yet. The threat alone may be enough to motivate them to stay
clear of the wrong behavior.

##### Start with the Suggestion of Discipline {.h5}

Police in North Carolina provide a potent example of using anticipatory
motivation in place of actual
punishment.[^5^](#notes.xhtml#r_ch7notes5){#ch7.xhtml#ch7notes5}
Traditionally, cops tried to put a dent in crime by implementing
aggressive search-and-arrest strategies that focused on a targeted area.
This blitz strategy tended to provoke public outrage and mobilize a
community against the policing efforts, and it rarely created effects
that lasted very long. As soon as the cops moved to the next area, new
faces came in to fill the old positions, and the bad guys were once
again in charge.

With their "Second Chance" strategy, authorities in North Carolina take
a different approach. Criminal justice officials invite individuals whom
they are about to arrest to attend an offender notification forum. The
district attorney's office promises that attendees won't be arrested
during a 90-minute meeting where authorities then make use of every
source of influence imaginable.

For example, along with the offenders, authorities bring in the
attendees' friends, family, and other community opinion leaders who ask
the criminals to give up their ways and seek normal employment. Next,
public officials clarify existing laws and likely consequences: if you
get caught, here's the likely penalty. Following this formal approach,
[]{#ch7.xhtml#page_166 type="pagebreak"}ex-offenders (usually former
gang members and drug dealers) talk about what they're currently doing
to stay straight. Finally, heads of public agencies explain choices the
offenders can make to avoid falling back into their old behaviors,
including job programs and what it takes to get signed up.

What makes these Second Chance meetings so effective is not merely that
they employ so many sources of influence but also that the meetings do
such a persuasive job in making it clear that the offenders *will* be
convicted and *will* serve long sentences.

After the first part of the meeting concludes, authorities invite the
participants (who might be getting bored with the monologue at this
point) to a different room where they see posters tacked to the walls.
Under each poster they find a small table with a binder on it. During
previous weeks police have gathered evidence, including video footage of
each of the attendees making at least one illicit drug sale.

As participants enter the new room, each is told, "Find your poster."
When they do, they discover that the poster sports a high-resolution
photo of them doing a drug deal. In the adjacent binder, they see all
the case evidence the police intend to use to prosecute them. Next the
invitees are asked to take a seat and watch a video. At this point the
local prosecutor states: "Raise your hand when you see yourself
committing a felony." One by one, they do. Next, authorities tell the
offenders that they've been put on a special list and will be
aggressively prosecuted when caught.

Combine this tactic with support from family and friends as well as job
programs, and the results were terrific. Small crimes dropped by 35
percent in certain neighborhoods in North Carolina, and in the three
neighborhoods where the initiative was implemented, 24 of 40 alleged
dealers have stayed clear of the law.

All this was done without having to haul nearly as many people off to
jail in order to catch their attention. Poignant, real, and immediate
[]{#ch7.xhtml#page_167 type="pagebreak"}threats of punishment help keep
potential hardened criminals on the straight and narrow.

And to enhance the credibility of their efforts, the authorities never
bluff. They invite drug dealers to the open forum, and those who don't
come are immediately arrested and prosecuted for the crimes recorded on
videotape. Those who go through the program and don't stay with their
new job training or do commit a crime are also immediately arrested.
Soon the word gets out that the authorities are serious about what they
say. Then the mere threat of possible negative consequences becomes much
more effective.

##### Only Discipline as a Last Resort {.h5}

The implications here should be clear. There are times when you're
simply going to have to discipline someone. A shot across the bow hasn't
been enough. You've tried incentives, exerted social pressure, and even
appealed to the person's sense of values, but the sources of influence
supporting the wrong behavior still remain victorious. It's time to make
judicious use of discipline.

This next example may be triggering to some readers. We include it
because it illustrates a clear case where discipline is an essential
element of influencing desperately needed change. Consider the horrible
cases of bride abduction in Ethiopia. Young girls were kidnapped on
their way to or from school, raped, and then forced to marry the rapist
in an effort to save face. This dreadful practice had survived in
silence for generations. Nobody wanted to talk about the issue. However,
that changed when a popular radio soap opera addressed the issue
head-on. Dr. Negussie Teffera worked with a staff of writers and
producers to create an enormously popular radio show titled *Yeken
Kignit* ("Looking over One's Daily
Life").[^6^](#notes.xhtml#r_ch7notes6){#ch7.xhtml#ch7notes6}

[]{#ch7.xhtml#page_168 type="pagebreak"}![Images](Grenny_0703.jpg)

Negussie Teffera changed not only attitudes but laws.

In one storyline, a much-admired character on the soap opera, a woman
named Wubalem, was abducted and then eventually freed and able to marry
the man she really loved. Immediately, this previously taboo topic
became part of the public discourse. The popular drama aroused such
general indignation that new laws were passed---and, equally important,
*enforced*---such that the practice has been largely eradicated in many
regions.

Now if a man assaults a young girl, instead of being allowed to keep the
victim as his wife, he is put in prison. Notice the influence
progression in this case, however. The moral and social case was made
first, and the legal punishment last. Real change would not have
happened had real punishment not been inflicted. But neither would it
have happened had the motivational groundwork for change not been
established with sources 1 and 3.

The need for enforcement of standards isn't just a social issue. It's
needed at times in a corporate environment as well. One of the first
questions we ask employees in companies that complain about a lack of
accountability is, "What does it take to get fired around here?" Almost
always the answers have nothing to do with poor performance.
[]{#ch7.xhtml#page_169 type="pagebreak"}"Embarrass the boss" is a common
response. Another is a sarcastic "Kill a really valuable coworker." In
other words, only raging violations of ethics or political faux pas get
the boot. When you hear these types of stories, you can bet that the
*lack* of discipline for routine infractions is sending a loud message
across the organization.

When the threat of negative consequences isn't enough to influence
change, the consequences need to be enforced. Otherwise, you may lose
the power of the other sources of influence at play. If you aren't
willing to follow through when people violate a core value (such as
giving their best effort), that value loses its moral force in the
organization.

### SUMMARY: STRUCTURAL MOTIVATION {.h3}

Administering rewards and discipline can be a tricky business. When you
look at the extrinsic motivators you're using to encourage or discourage
behavior, take care to adhere to a few helpful principles:

**1.**   **Use extrinsic rewards third.** Get personal and social
motivators in place first. Let the value of the behavior itself, along
with social influences, carry the bulk of the motivational load.

**2.**   **Use incentives wisely.** Don't be afraid to draw on small,
heartfelt tokens of appreciation. Remember, when it comes to extrinsic
rewards, less is often more.

**3.**   **Reward behavior, not just results.** Take care to link
rewards to the vital behaviors you want to see repeated, not just the
results. Sometimes outcomes hide inappropriate behaviors.

**4.**   **Discipline sparingly.** Finally, if you end up having to
administer discipline, first take a shot across the bow. Let people know
what's coming before you impose the punishment. Then, if all else fails,
follow through on the consequences.

[]{#ch8a.xhtml}

[]{#ch8a.xhtml#page_170 type="pagebreak"}![Images](Grenny_0801.jpg)

[]{#ch8.xhtml}

[]{#ch8.xhtml#page_171 type="pagebreak"}8 {#ch8.xhtml#ch8 .h2n}
-----------------------------------------

CHANGE THE ENVIRONMENT {.h2ta}
----------------------

*Source 6: Structural Ability*

*One of the simplest ways to increase your influence is to make physical
and virtual changes that make bad behavior harder and good behavior
easier.*

We'll now explore one of the most consequential but overlooked sources
of influence, which is source 6, *structural ability*: the influence of
our physical and virtual environments. We are often blind to the
formidable force of the *things* and *information* we're immersed in.
And because of that, we often grossly underutilize this relentless
source of influence.

One of the best ways to increase people's *ability* to change is to
simply modify some aspect of their environment to make the old behavior
harder or the good behavior easier.

[]{#ch8.xhtml#page_172 type="pagebreak"}Let's start with a classic
example of influence theory. In the late 1940s, representatives from the
National Restaurant Association (NRA) asked William Foote Whyte, a
professor at the University of Chicago, to help them with a growing
problem.[^1^](#notes.xhtml#r_ch8notes1){#ch8.xhtml#ch8notes1} After
World War II, Americans began eating out in unprecedented numbers.
Unfortunately, the restaurant industry wasn't ready for the surge of
customers.

As dining volumes increased, hot conflict grew between waitstaff
(typically female) and kitchen crews (typically male). A waitress would
rush to the counter, shout an order to busy cooks, then rush back to her
customers. If the order was not ready when she returned, she would urge
the cook to hurry, shouting expressions of encouragement such as, "Hey,
hairball, where's the breaded veal? You got a broken arm or what?"

The cooks usually responded In kind. Later, when the waitress received
an incorrect order, the two would exchange still more unflattering
remarks. After being yelled at a couple of times, the cooks often took
revenge by slowing down. Dr. Whyte even observed cooks turning their
backs on the servers and intentionally ignoring them until they left,
sometimes in tears.

If you wanted to improve waitstaff relationships with cooks, what would
you do? Improve communication skills (source 2)? Create incentives for
quality improvement (source 5)? Or perhaps ask more polite staff to
mentor their feistier peers (source 3)?

Dr. Whyte recommended that the restaurants use a 50-cent metal spindle
to gather orders. He then asked servers to skewer a detailed written
order on the spindle. Cooks were then to pull orders off and fill them
in whatever sequence seemed most efficient (though generally following a
first-in, first-out policy).

Whyte tried the idea at a restaurant the next day. Training consisted of
a 10-minute instruction session for both cooks and servers. Managers
reported an immediate decrease in conflict and customer complaints. All
preferred the new structure, and both groups reported that they were
being treated better. The concept spread across the
[]{#ch8.xhtml#page_173 type="pagebreak"}entire industry, resulting in
dramatic changes in server/cook relationships as well as customer
experience.

Sometimes introducing a simple technology or tweaking a process is the
fastest path to change.

### FISH DISCOVER WATER LAST {.h3}

If you didn't think of Whyte's solution, you're in good company. The
average person rarely thinks of changing the physical world as a way of
changing human behavior. We see that others are misbehaving, and we look
to change *them*, not their environment. Caught up in the human side of
things, we completely miss the impact of subtle yet powerful sources
such as the size of a room or the impact of a chair.

One of our most powerful sources of influence is often the least used
because it's the least noticeable. In the words of Fred Steele, the
renowned sociotechnical theorist, most of us are "environmentally
incompetent."

For example, the authors once met with the president of a large
insurance company who lamented that no one gave him tough feedback. He
pointed to recent instances where he had made important decisions with
bad information because people were reluctant to challenge his opinions.
"I keep telling people to open up, but it's not working," he complained.

The first time we met with him in person we had to traverse six hallways
(each the length of an aircraft carrier), walk by hundreds of thousands
of dollars of museum-quality artwork, then pass through a security
entrance and a formal waiting area. Finally, we entered the president's
office to find him seated behind a desk the size of a pickle­ball court.
Then, while seated in loosely stuffed chairs that slung us next to the
floor and pushed our knees up and into our chests, we stared up at the
president, much like grade-school children looking up at the principal.

[]{#ch8.xhtml#page_174 type="pagebreak"}The president's first words
were, "I get the feeling that people around here are scared to talk to
me."

Perhaps he had missed the fact that his office was laid out like
Hitler's chancellery. (Hitler demanded more than 480 feet of hallway so
that visitors would "get a taste of the power and grandeur of the German
Reich" on
arriving.)[^2^](#notes.xhtml#r_ch8notes2){#ch8.xhtml#ch8notes2}

Structural forces have a big impact on behavior, so it's important to
spend time discovering them.

### "THINGS" MATTER {.h3}

Common categories of structural influencers include the physical,
informational, virtual, and social. For example, changing a policy, law,
or work process can prompt significant changes in behavior. Changing
notifications and home page screens on electronic devices can
dramatically reduce impulsive thoughts, feelings, and behaviors. And
simply strapping an activity measurement device to your wrist can nudge
you toward stairs rather than the elevator more often than usual.

Consider the mostly unnoticed effect of *things* on entire communities.
Before the arrival of George Kelling, New York subways were a favorite
venue for muggers, murderers, and drug dealers. Kelling, a criminologist
and originator of the "broken windows theory" of
crime,[^3^](#notes.xhtml#r_ch8notes3){#ch8.xhtml#ch8notes3} argued that
disordered surroundings send out an unspoken but powerful message that
encourages antisocial behavior.

"A broken window left in disrepair," Kelling explained, "suggests that
no one is in charge and no one cares."

This relatively minor condition promotes more disorderly behavior,
including violence. Kelling advised community leaders to start sweating
the small stuff. Under his direction, crews began nightly remediation on
graffiti, litter, and vandalism. Officials organized crews in the train
yard that rolled paint over newly applied graffiti the instant a subway
car came in for service.

[]{#ch8.xhtml#page_175 type="pagebreak"}Over time, a combination of
cleanup and prosecution for minor offenses began to make a difference.
Surroundings improved, community pride increased, and petty crimes
declined. So did violent crime---by 75 percent. Even seemingly innocuous
visual cues shape attitudes and behavior in significant ways.

One final example should suffice to demonstrate how unconscious we can
be of environmental influences on our choices. Social scientist Brian
Wansink suggests that you and I make over 200 eating decisions every day
without realizing it. This mindless eating adds hundreds of calories to
our diets without adding at all to our
satisfaction.[^4^](#notes.xhtml#r_ch8notes4){#ch8.xhtml#ch8notes4}

For example, in partnership with him we once invited a couple of dozen
kids from a soccer team to join us for lunch after training vigorously
for two hours on a Saturday morning. Half of the kids were randomly
assigned to eat on seven-inch diameter plates. The rest used plates
roughly twice as large. Then we stealthily measured how much each
athlete ate by weighing serving bowls before and after the meal. As
you'd expect, the kids with the bigger plates ate more.

What's shocking is *how much* more.

While all the kids reported they had eaten all they wanted, we found
that those with the larger plates ate 73 percent more!

![Images](Grenny_0802.jpg)

Why did some kids eat 73 percent more than equally hungry peers?

[]{#ch8.xhtml#page_176 type="pagebreak"}Wansink's research has
identified dozens of ways that distance, size, color, and placement
dramatically affect consumption patterns, but most of us don't take
these variables into account when trying to change our own eating
habits.

#### Why We Overlook the Power of "Things" {.h4}

Why don't we capitalize on the influence of *things* as much as we
could? There are two reasons:

**1.**   **Invisibility.** Elements from our environment remain
invisible to us. Work procedures, office layouts, and reporting
structures aren't always obvious culprits, and we often fail to notice
their impact.

**2.**   **Incompetence.** Even when we do think about the impact of our
environment, we don't know what to do about it. It's not as if we're
carrying around a head full of sociophysical theories. If someone were
to tell us that we need to worry about Festinger, Schachter, and Lewin's
theory of propinquity (the impact of space on relationships---a topic
we'll explore later), we'd think he or she was pulling our leg.
Propinquity? Who's ever heard of propinquity?

To access this last, crucial set of influence tools, we must become
environmentally competent. We must (1) remember to think about *things*
and (2) be able to come up with theories of how changing *things* will
change behavior.

There are too many structural influence factors in the world to address
in one chapter. So rather than attempt a comprehensive treatment of
everything that enables or inhibits behavior, we'll call attention to a
few that are most often overlooked or underestimated.

We hope these illustrations prompt you to look carefully at the
structural factors that might be of greatest significance to you as a
leader.

#### []{#ch8.xhtml#page_177 type="pagebreak"}Learn to Use "Things" to Make Good Behavior Easier {.h4}

One of the simplest ways to increase your influence is to make physical
and virtual changes that make bad behavior harder and good behavior
easier. We'll discuss five ways of achieving this:

**1.**   Add a cue.

**2.**   Change the data stream.

**3.**   Promote propinquity.

**4.**   Make it easy.

**5.**   Change a process.

### ADD A CUE {.h3}

When behavior is unconscious---as so much of our behavior is---a simple
cue can help people make more conscious, better choices.

For example, in another experiment, Brian Wansink gave cans of stacked
potato chips to various
subjects.[^5^](#notes.xhtml#r_ch8notes5){#ch8.xhtml#ch8notes5} Control
subjects were given normal cans with uniform chips piled one on top of
the other. Experimental subjects were given cans in which every tenth
chip was an odd color. The next nine chips would be normal and were
followed by another odd-colored chip.

Subjects were asked to engage in other activities while snacking on
their chips. Afterward, researchers measured how much each subject had
consumed. Those with the colored chips consumed 37 percent less than
control subjects who had no indication of how many chips they'd eaten.

What was going on here? By coloring every tenth chip, Wansink helped
make the invisible visible. Nobody said anything about the chips or the
colors. Nobody encouraged people to control their eating. But the visual
cue made eaters conscious of the volume of chips they were eating, and
that awareness alone helped them make a decision rather than follow an
impulse.

[]{#ch8.xhtml#page_178 type="pagebreak"}Using cues to make the invisible
visible offers potent influence in the workplace as well. In the 1960s,
Emery Air Freight pioneered the use of containerized
shipping.[^6^](#notes.xhtml#r_ch8notes6){#ch8.xhtml#ch8notes6} The
company came up with the idea of using sturdy, reusable, and uniformly
sized containers---and the whole world changed.

Uniform containers were so much more efficient than previous methods
that international shipping prices plummeted. Along with the
unprecedented drop in price, industries that had previously been
protected from global competition because of high transportation costs
(e.g., steel and automobiles) suddenly found themselves competing with
anyone, anywhere.

And yet, early on, Edward Feeney, Emery's vice president of systems
performance at the time, was frustrated because he couldn't get the
workforce to use the new containers to their capacity. Containers were
being sealed and shipped without being properly filled. An audit team
found they were being properly filled only 45 percent of the time. The
workers were extensively trained and constantly reminded of the
importance of completely filling the containers, but they were still
failing to do it more than half of the time.

After exhausting attempts to influence better behaviors, Feeney stumbled
on a method that worked instantly. He simply drew a "fill to here" line
on the inside of every container.

Immediately, the rate of completely filled containers went from 45
percent to 95 percent. All it took was a small cue that made the
invisible visible.

A hospital we worked with achieved dramatic cost savings with a
similarly simple cue. Leaders encouraged clinicians to pay attention to
even small product decisions that eventually cost a great deal of money.
For example, a type of powderless latex gloves cost over 10 times more
than a pair of regular, less-comfortable disposable gloves. Yet in spite
of regular pleas from senior management to reduce costs, almost everyone
in the facility continued to use the pricey gloves for even short tasks.

[]{#ch8.xhtml#page_179 type="pagebreak"}The powderless latex was more
comfortable than the cheaper gloves, and besides, what were a few
pennies here and there?

Then one day someone placed a "25¢" sign on the box of inexpensive
gloves and a "\$3.00" sign on the box of pricier latex gloves. Problem
solved. Once fuller information was made visible, people made more
deliberate choices and the use of the expensive gloves dropped
dramatically.

::: {.sidebar}
**Act Like an Influencer**

In the mid-1990s, Bogotá, Colombia, faced a terrible water shortage.
Mayor Antanas Mockus rallied various sources of influence to reduce
water use by 40 percent in a matter of months. One of his strategies
involved a cue to help people hear his message loud and clear.

After airing public service announcements in which he taught
water-saving vital behaviors, he used the country's overloaded phone
system to cleverly cue people to practice the behaviors. Every time they
got a busy signal, rather than hearing a tedious, rhythmic beep, they
got either Mockus's voice or that of the Colombian pop star Shakira
saying, "Thank you for saving
water!"[^7^](#notes.xhtml#r_ch8notes7){#ch8.xhtml#ch8notes7}
:::

### CHANGE THE DATA STREAM {.h3}

The leaders we just cited had one strategy in common: they showcased
select information at crucial moments to prompt different decisions. In
these cases, individuals weren't resisting better choices because of a
bad attitude. Their behavior was shaped by their data stream. The gloves
they chose or the level to which they filled a container was driven
[]{#ch8.xhtml#page_180 type="pagebreak"}by the information---or lack
thereof---in their immediate experience. Merely tweaking their data
stream was sufficient to change behavior.

Despite the fact that we're often exposed to incomplete or inaccurate
data, if information is fed to us frequently and routinely enough, we
begin to act on it as if it were an accurate sample of the greater
reality, even when it often isn't. For example, try this experiment. As
quickly as you can, name every place in the world where armed conflict
is currently taking place. If you're like most people, you can name an
average of two to four places. Now ask yourself why you named these
particular locales. Is it because these are the only places? Perhaps
they're locations where there is the most bloodshed? Or is it because
these are the places of most political significance?

It's probably because these are the sites that have received sustained
media coverage. At any one time there are as many as two dozen armed
conflicts taking place throughout the world, and it's not uncommon that
some of the most horrific battles go largely unnoticed by the
international audience. What's shocking about this is *not* that our
mental agenda is so heavily influenced by a handful of news producers.
It's that we are typically unaware that it's happening.

Influential leaders understand the importance of an accurate data stream
and serving up visible, timely, and accurate information that supports
their goals. Instead of falling victim to data, they manage it.

Imagine what Dr. Donald Hopkins at The Carter Center was up against when
he kicked off the global campaign to eradicate Guinea worm disease. His
biggest challenge was to move it to the top of the agenda of
developing-world leaders who typically worried a lot more about coups,
economic disasters, and corrupt politicians than about parasites.

Add to competing priorities the fact that most leaders had grown up in
urban areas and were completely unaware of the pervasive effects of the
Guinea worm in their own country.

Jimmy Carter, former US president and founder of The Carter Center, told
us that the first challenge leaders faced when attacking
[]{#ch8.xhtml#page_181 type="pagebreak"}Guinea worm disease in Pakistan
was that the president of Pakistan had never even heard of the parasite.
Even leaders who knew how widespread the problem was paid little
attention to the villages that were plagued because they drew their
political support from urban areas.

![Images](Grenny_0803.jpg)

Dr. Donald Hopkins saved millions from a dreaded disease without even
finding a cure.

Dr. Hopkins addressed this problem by presenting data in clever ways to
influence the priorities of heads of state. In Nigeria, for example,
national leaders assumed that there were only a few thousand cases
nationwide. In 1989, after village coordinators from around the country
reported the number of infections in their region, leaders were
horrified to discover that there were well over 650,000 cases. They had
been off by 3,000 percent! This made Nigeria the most endemic country in
the world.

With that new piece of information alone, support for eradicating the
disease skyrocketed.

Dr. Hopkins gets the information in front of leaders in a way that gets
their attention. His team publishes lots of graphs, charts, and
[]{#ch8.xhtml#page_182 type="pagebreak"}tables. But none has been more
influential than the Guinea worm race. Remember the graphic of a
racetrack with the faces of the heads of state showing where they were
in the race to eradicate the disease?

"I was talking with the president of Burkina Faso," Hopkins reports,
"and sharing some concerns about the campaign. I had all kinds of graphs
and charts, but the one he wanted to look at the most was the Guinea
worm race. They can't stand to be at the bottom. It gets their
attention."

There's nothing like a little bit of data coupled with a social nudge to
both motivate and enable change.

At the corporate level, the fact that different groups of employees are
exposed to wildly different data streams helps explain why people often
have such different priorities and passions.

The frontline employees who interface with complaining customers usually
become the customer advocates. The top-level executives who are
constantly poring over financial statements become the shareholder
advocates. And those who routinely take quality measures become the
quality advocates.

It's hard to expect people to act in balanced ways when they have access
to only one data stream.

For instance, members of a group of senior executives we worked with
were driven by their production numbers, which they reviewed weekly.
When issues of morale came up (usually with the issuance of a
grievance), they'd become rightfully concerned about "people problems,"
but generally only after it was too late. The same was true for customer
satisfaction. This was also listed as a high priority, but nobody ever
actually talked about customers or did anything to improve customer
relationships until the company lost a major client to a competitor.

To change the executives' narrow focus, we changed the data stream.
Alongside weekly production numbers, executives now enthusiastically
pore over customer and employee data. Now they spread their attention
across more stakeholders.

[]{#ch8.xhtml#page_183 type="pagebreak"}We also provided employees who
had long shown passion for customer satisfaction with weekly cost and
profit data, and they too broadened their interests. When faced with a
dissatisfied customer, instead of simply throwing money at the problem
(often the easiest solution), employees began to seek other, more
cost-effective fixes.

Before the intervention, both leaders and employees talked about the
importance of all their stakeholders. But nothing changed their behavior
until their data stream expanded.

One warning about data. When it comes to data, there is such a thing as
"too much of a good thing." An incessant flow of reports, dashboards,
and emails transforms into numbing and incoherent background noise.
Great leaders avoid this mistake. They're focused and deliberate about
the data they share. They understand that the only reason for gathering
or publishing data is to reinforce vital behaviors.

::: {.sidebar}
**Act Like an Influencer**

The leaders of a condo association were frustrated with the money they
were spending maintaining trees. Every year 50 or more trees died and
were replaced at about \$500 per tree. As far as the property management
was concerned, the process was automatic. After all, a tree is a tree is
a tree---right? Then an owner decided to number and tag each tree and to
maintain a database. He tagged about 400 trees and added the species of
the tree and the problems it faced.

The association quickly discovered that not all trees are alike and not
every tree was suited for every part of their property. In fact, there
was one area, a swampy one, where none of the trees they'd planted had
survived. And yet they'd faithfully replanted there every year, not
taking into consideration which trees would thrive in the wet soil.
Creating this simple database influenced people's actions in ways that
saved trees, money, and labor.
:::

### []{#ch8.xhtml#page_184 type="pagebreak"}PROMOTE PROPINQUITY {.h3}

In the workplace, one of the most powerful predictors of relationships
is the physical environment in which people work. The placement of
walls, cubicles, and conference rooms affects who knows whom and who
likes whom as much as any other influence. Yet few of us examine these
elements when we're trying to understand and change behaviors.
Architects create space, and then we live with its effects, mostly
unnoticed.

When social psychologist Leon Festinger and others first started
examining the effects of space on relationships, they had no idea that
they had stumbled onto one of the most profound social-psychological
phenomena of all time: propinquity. Simply put, *propinquity* is
physical proximity.

For instance, look at who collaborates on spontaneous group efforts at
work. Examine who has the most friends and acquaintances in an apartment
complex. Explore which employees are satisfied with their relationship
with their supervisor. Surely most of these complicated interpersonal
scenarios are largely a function of personal interests and interpersonal
chemistry---right?

Not really. Festinger discovered that the frequency and quality of human
interaction is largely a function of physical
distance.[^8^](#notes.xhtml#r_ch8notes8){#ch8.xhtml#ch8notes8} Apartment
dwellers who are located near stairwells are acquainted with more people
than individuals who have fewer people walking by their front doors. And
those who live across from the mailboxes know more of their neighbors
than anyone else in the building.

At the corporate level, bosses who interact the most frequently with
their subordinates generally have the best relationships. And who
interacts most often? Bosses who are located closest to their direct
reports.

In a study conducted at Bell Labs, researchers tested for factors that
determine whether two scientists might
collaborate.[^9^](#notes.xhtml#r_ch8notes9){#ch8.xhtml#ch8notes9} The
best predictor was, you guessed it, *the distance between their
offices.* Scientists []{#ch8.xhtml#page_185 type="pagebreak"}who worked
next to one another were three times more likely to discuss technical
topics that led to collaboration than scientists who sat 30 feet from
one another. Moving them 90 feet apart lowers the likelihood of
collaboration to that of those who work several miles apart! The
probability of collaboration sharply decreases in a matter of a few
feet.

#### What About Virtual Environments? {.h4}

This might sound like a troubling indictment of the move toward remote
and virtual workforces. But our research suggests that propinquity can
be achieved through virtual proximity as much as physical. The old model
of colocation, where companies demanded that everyone arrive at the same
time to the same location, eat lunch on the same schedule, use the same
restrooms, and park in the same lot had the happy effect of creating
"predictable spontaneity." Employees would connect, share, and build
trust through serendipitous interaction. This led many to falsely
conclude that colocation was an essential condition for deep employee
connection and engagement.

But it never was. If you coax a dozen people into an elevator, they
can't help but bump up against each other. But that doesn't mean they'll
exit the elevator with a collective determination to excel. If
colocation was the key to connection, all colocated organizations would
have equally healthy cultures. But they don't. Why? The difference is
leadership.

We studied a few hundred organizations that had abruptly shifted from
colocation to work-from-home. The majority of those we studied that had
made the shift lost an enormous amount of what scholars call *social
capital* in the transition. For example, measures of trust, commitment,
and discretionary effort (a willingness to give more than the minimum
expected) had all plummeted during the two years since the shift had
occurred.

The majority had weakened---but not all. About one in four of those we
studied was a *positive deviant*. These surprisingly successful
[]{#ch8.xhtml#page_186 type="pagebreak"}organizations had seen dramatic
*improvement* in social capital during the exact same transition. Why?

In every case, leaders had created new virtual rituals to replace
physical serendipity. They created new norms of virtual socializing,
problem-solving, and ad hoc connection that replaced the water cooler,
lunchroom, and elevator.

For example, one leader required everyone in her organization to do a
"15-minute check-in" every day with an assigned "talking partner." A
lightly structured agenda made room for participants to discuss personal
life as well as work-related hopes, fears, and successes. Talking
partners rotated monthly, giving employees a chance to create meaningful
connections with more people.

Examples of social capital--building rituals varied widely in our study,
but every organization that had benefited from the transition was the
same in one respect: *leaders created virtual structure to replace the
physical structure*. They invented intentional practices that enabled a
greater sense of connection than their employees experienced in
colocation. Geography is not destiny. But leadership is.

When leaders fail to foster social propinquity, whether in colocated or
distributed workforces, bad things happen. Silos form and infighting
reigns. Employees start labeling others with ugly terms such as "them"
and "they"---meaning the bad people "out there" with whom they rarely
interact. If you want to predict who doesn't trust or get along with
whom in a company, examine propinquity.

#### An Example from The Other Side Academy {.h4}

The Other Side Academy sets the standard for using propinquity to
influence change. Dave Durocher's goal, remember, is to foster two vital
behaviors. He wants students to be responsible for others rather than
just themselves, and he wants to ensure that everyone confronts everyone
with whom they have concerns. But how? When they first
[]{#ch8.xhtml#page_187 type="pagebreak"}arrive, these are people who are
more likely to punch each other out than lift each other up.

The first thing Durocher does is to stack previously mortal enemies on
top of one another. He takes three guys---one new resident who's a
card-carrying member of the Mexican Mafia, another who six months
earlier was a Crip, and another who just a year ago was a leader in the
Aryan Brotherhood---and makes them roommates. Eight such diverse folks
might share a dorm. Someone from another background will be the crew
boss. It's like a cultural salad bar with every possible grouping tossed
into the mix, and then they're asked to help and confront each
other---in healthy ways.

We saw the effects firsthand. A fairly new student we'll call Kurt---a
white man embroidered with racist prison tattoos---rounded a corner too
sharply and nicked a wall with an armoire. Kurt had been at the Academy
for just a couple of months and had recently been asked by Andrew, a
crew boss, who was Black, to help for the first time in the moving
company. Apparently, Kurt hadn't mastered the job yet. What followed was
in no small part influenced by the fact that Kurt slept on a bunk four
feet above Andrew's---a proximity that had already begun to lower the
walls that had previously separated them.

Kurt had come from a majority Black area of Compton, California, where
he had been schooled since age six in the hateful propaganda of the
white-gang culture. He had been homeless for five years before joining
the Academy, and for the first 60 days after entering the program he
thought he'd die as his body adjusted to a life without drugs. Taking
tight corners with expensive furniture was not his priority.

When Kurt nicked the wall, he ducked his head in shame. The man on the
other end of the armoire saw the nick and shook his head in
disappointment. Kurt burned with humiliation and began to think
seriously about running out the front door. Seeing this, Andrew waited
until Kurt finished the maneuver, tugged him by the arm to a quiet
corner []{#ch8.xhtml#page_188 type="pagebreak"}of the room, and said,
"That's the smallest nick a freshman has ever made. I'll go make it
right with the customer. Just help me finish this move." Kurt expected
many things from Andrew, but not this. An unexpected moment of grace in
a vulnerable moment so contradicted the scripts he carried that
something inside Kurt shifted. He squared his shoulders and ran back to
the truck for his next item.

While there's a lot going on at The Other Side Academy to influence
change, you can't help but notice the influence of propinquity. When you
make people interdependent and put them in close proximity, you increase
the chance that relationships will form and become a big part of their
personal transformation.

Families are also affected by how they make use of their environment.
For example, a recent study showed that the family dining table is
vanishing from homes at a rapid rate. A parallel rise in family
dysfunction and discontent suggests that familial unity is declining at
a similar rate. Could there be a correlation here? The idea is not that
a drop in furniture sales will harm family solidarity. It's that a
regular ritual of family dining can facilitate connection. But why would
families stop buying and using dining room tables? Behold the microwave.
There was a time when the preparation of the evening meal was such a
complex undertaking that everyone, of necessity, ate at the same time
and in the same place. The microwave changed all that by making it easy
to prepare single portions for whomever whenever. Suddenly there was no
need to prepare one big meal at one time.

The family dinner was a regular ritual that brought people into
face-to-face communication. Nowadays family schedules and structures are
far more diverse. Because of that the need for structured opportunities
to build connection is even greater and more challenging. Couple the
shift away from family meals with the rise of individually consumed
media (we watch our personal devices rather than gather around a
television), and you'll see how disruptions in structural enablers
(source 6) have weakened family ties.

#### []{#ch8.xhtml#page_189 type="pagebreak"}Propinquity and Rising from Poverty {.h4}

Great leaders like Bangladesh's Muhammad Yunus leverage propinquity to
change lives. For generations Bengali women had been kept from venturing
very far outside their own homes. Yunus realized early on that a new
environment could provide a context within which impoverished women
could slowly and safely invent a new reality. He built inexpensive
village bank centers where women would meet in solidarity. A typical
meeting is about much more than plotting a business launch or repaying a
loan.

We once watched the power of propinquity at the humble village bank
building in Gazipur, Bangladesh. One of the tenured women in the group
of 30 borrowers walked confidently to the front of the room and greeted
her sisters with a snappy two-fingered salute. At once, they stood and
recited their "16 Decisions." They fervently and unitedly committed to
discipline, unity, courage, and hard work. They pledge that they would
no longer live in dilapidated houses. They would grow and eat
vegetables. We were tracking pretty well until they got to number
11---"We shall not take dowry at our sons' weddings, neither shall we
give any dowry at our daughters' weddings."

Upon asking, we were told that this commitment is of grave importance to
the group's economic well-being. The dowry---which parents are required
to pay a man to marry their daughter---can cause both social strife and
economic disaster. Families are brought to poverty as they try to scrape
together enough money for an acceptable dowry. Daughters are routinely
berated by fathers who lament the fact that they fathered a girl who
would later cost them so much money. Now, here stood 30 women at
attention, loudly proclaiming their commitment to abolish the "curse of
the dowry."

Later, as we chatted with the 30 women, we asked, "How many of you have
had a son or daughter marry in the past year?" Five women proudly raised
their hands. And then we sprung the follow-up question. "How many of you
either gave or received dowry?" Three hands []{#ch8.xhtml#page_190
type="pagebreak"}went sheepishly into the air. But two---Dipali and
Shirina---didn't raise theirs. Here was evidence that this
millennium-old practice was giving way. So we asked the two women to
tell us how they had resisted the practice. They smiled broadly, looked
at each other, and then Dipali said, "My son married her daughter." With
that the 30 women broke into spontaneous applause.

No longer did these women hide behind their own front doors and simply
take what fate handed them. Now they met, talked, formed businesses,
supported each other, signed for each other's loans, and became a
genuine community, *all within the confines of their own building*.
Great leaders leverage the power of propinquity.

::: {.sidebar}
**Act Like an Influencer**

The senior leaders of a healthcare system were very proud of their new
facility, built by a famous architect. Clinical managers disappointed
with their poor hand-hygiene numbers suggested adding hand sanitizers
inside and outside every door. It was a good idea, but the architect
said it would "interrupt the visual flow" of the hallways.

After some discussion, the senior team decided that "bacteria flow is
more important than visual flow." Their decision was the right one.
Altering this aspect of their physical environment was an important
ingredient in bringing their hand-hygiene numbers above 90 percent.
:::

### MAKE IT EASY {.h3}

The general principle in source 6 is to make it easier to do the right
thing and harder to do the wrong thing. Cueing makes it easier to think
[]{#ch8.xhtml#page_191 type="pagebreak"}about making a better decision.
Managing the data stream can make it easier to feel differently about
various choices. And propinquity does a little of both. Our next
strategy involves simply making the behavior itself easier to do. It is
easier to motivate someone to do something if it requires little effort
to do it.

Effective leaders apply efficiency principles at the very highest level.
Rather than constantly finding ways to motivate people to continue with
their boring, painful, dangerous, or otherwise unappealing activities,
they find a way to change *things*. Skilled leaders change *things* in
order to make the right behaviors easier to adopt. They also use
*things* to make the wrong behaviors more difficult.

For example, one of the main reasons the Guinea worm disease was
eradicated so effectively across the sprawling subcontinent of India was
that leaders took steps to make it far easier to drink good water than
to drink bad water.

As we saw earlier, leaders from The Carter Center found that villagers
who filtered the water had decreased Guinea worm infections. That worked
well for those who consumed water carried home from local water
supplies. But medical experts discovered that the Guinea worm was often
perpetuating itself through occasional drinks taken from distant ponds
by itinerant shepherds.

A thirsty boy watching a few goats would happen upon an infected puddle,
squat for a sip of water, and ingest invisible larvae. Once infected, if
he ventured back to the village's water source, he reintroduced Guinea
worm eggs there, giving the worm another year to wreak havoc on the
whole community. To solve this problem, Dr. Hopkins and his team could
have attempted more aggressive enforcement, more motivational appeals,
or even more social pressure. But they didn't. Instead, they created a
tool.

They manufactured an inexpensive plastic pipe with a built-in filter
that could be used to take a quick drink from available water. The pipe
was attractive to shepherds because it offered the added benefit
[]{#ch8.xhtml#page_192 type="pagebreak"}of filtering out more obvious
debris and required less bending over to reach the water.

![Images](Grenny_0804.jpg)

A cheap plastic tool eliminated reintroduction of Guinea worm to
hundreds of villages simply by making a better choice a lot easier to
do.

#### Back to Propinquity {.h4}

We've already talked about the power of propinquity. Sometimes just a
little *more* distance makes the bad behavior hard enough that it's
easier to overcome. For example, in another collaboration with Brian
Wansink, we placed bowls filled with colorful M&Ms in 50 of our
colleagues' offices. At the end of every day we returned to measure how
many had disappeared. In half of the offices the bowls were placed next
to the computer keyboard. In the rest, they were placed four feet
farther away on the bookshelf. We found that those who had to reach more
than an arm's distance ate only half as much.

Simply altering distance can be enough to influence dramatic behavior
change. Move your exercise bike from near your TV to your basement, and
you've just dramatically cut your chances of using it. Travel to a gym
for your routine cardiovascular exercise (as opposed
[]{#ch8.xhtml#page_193 type="pagebreak"}to using a piece of home
equipment), and this too might lessen your chances substantially.

::: {.sidebar}
*Watch a short video where author Joseph Grenny shares four ways leaders
can become more influential at
[CrucialInfluence.com](http://CrucialInfluence.com).*
:::

So, if you're trying to influence your own lifestyle habits, do a quick
inventory of things that affect your behavior. Take a count of how many
bad food choices are within your reach at each hour of a typical day.
Then take a count of how many good choices are within the same distance.
Look at how difficult it is for you to exercise. Do you have to walk to
a distant and socially isolated room to get to your equipment? Do you
have to unpack something from a closet before you can get started?
Discover how many items in your home you can simply *move* to make the
right behavior easier and the wrong behavior more difficult.

Healthcare institutions have also learned the importance of making the
correct behavior easier. Consider what many institutions are doing to
reduce medication errors. In the past, pills came only in reddish-brown
bottles that offered no information about their content and looked just
like the reddish-brown bottles next to them. Couple this challenge with
the fact that many people who fill medical orders do so after pulling
back-to-back shifts while squinting to read poor handwriting that passes
as a prescription, and it's easy to see why medication errors cause tens
of thousands of deaths
annually.[^10^](#notes.xhtml#r_ch8notes10){#ch8.xhtml#ch8notes10}

Nowadays progressive pharmaceutical companies and hospitals make the
right choices obvious. By deft use of colored bottles and better labels,
many hospitals have significantly reduced medication errors and
subsequently needless deaths.

No one knows the wisdom of making choices easier better than the retail
world. Consumer guru Paco Underhill helped increase the sales of doggie
treats by making it just a little easier to take them off a
[]{#ch8.xhtml#page_194
type="pagebreak"}shelf.[^11^](#notes.xhtml#r_ch8notes11){#ch8.xhtml#ch8notes11}
Underhill found that young and middle-aged adults were more likely to
buy animal treats than were older adults and children. This piqued his
curiosity. He videotaped customers in the pet aisle and quickly
discovered what was keeping treat sales low among certain age groups.
Typically the staple items like pet food were on the eye- and
waist-level shelves, while treats were placed on higher shelves.

It turns out that the young and old find it significantly more difficult
to reach items on a higher shelf. One video clip showed an older woman
attempting to use a carton of aluminum foil to knock down a package of
treats. Another revealed a child dangerously climbing shelves to try to
reach the package. Moving the treats down one shelf made the behavior
just easy enough to boost sales immediately. Love it or hate it, people
who want something from you tweak your environment every way they can to
part you from your hard-earned money!

#### Make It Inevitable {.h4}

The ultimate way to make better choices easier is to make them
inevitable. This is where structure, process, and procedures come into
play. Engineers, tired of reminding employees not to stick their fingers
in certain machines, build in mechanical features that prevent people
from putting their hands at risk. Pilots follow lockstep procedures and
rigid checklists that require them to double and triple check their
takeoff and landing procedures.

When taking orders in the fast-food industry, employees can simply push
picture buttons. And of course, nobody has to know how to make change
because the register does it automatically.

It's all been routinized so it's now almost impossible to do the wrong
thing.

Often all that's required to make good behavior inevitable is to
structure it into your daily routine. If we've learned only one thing
about today's overscheduled world, it's that structure drives out lack
of structure. Meetings happen. On the other hand, "I'll get back to you
[]{#ch8.xhtml#page_195 type="pagebreak"}sometime later"---maybe that
won't happen. So, if you want to guarantee a positive behavior, build it
into a special meeting or hardwire it into an existing meeting agenda.

For example, one CEO saw a massive increase in innovative breakthroughs
when he and his senior leadership team scheduled and met regularly with
groups of employees to solicit ideas. This calendared practice created a
forum that encouraged and enabled new behaviors, thereby making the
right behavior inevitable.

At The Other Side Academy, vital behaviors are hardwired into regular
*rituals*. These ordered procedures consist of fixed meetings that are
never missed and that are highly symbolic, quite volatile, and
enormously effective at making the right behavior inevitable. As we
mentioned earlier, one of them is called "Games." This particular ritual
is not always fun, but it's always done.

Say you're a student at the Academy. Twice a week you and members of
your assigned group get together to give each other unvarnished
feedback. Two older students ensure that nothing gets physical, but
beyond that it's pretty unstructured. During Games, people learn the
unrestricted approach to feedback that The Other Side Academy wants.
Anyone can challenge anyone. If you think your crew boss is a jerk, you
give him a slip of paper inviting him to a Game. He must show up. And
when he's there, you can unload on him to your heart's content. Anyone
from Dave Durocher on down can be invited to a Game by anyone else.

Over time, the quality of the Games increases as the volume decreases.
Students become better at sharing feedback. What doesn't change is that
this long-standing ritual makes the right behavior inevitable. Most
people don't like to confront others---particularly scary and powerful
others. Left to their own proclivities, students would do what anyone
else would do: toggle from silence (holding our complaints inside) to
violence (blowing up in a verbal tirade---or worse). So Durocher turns
feedback into a ritual, calls it "Games," and then lets the Games begin.
Twice a week without fail.

### []{#ch8.xhtml#page_196 type="pagebreak"}CHANGE A PROCESS {.h3}

Most of our behavior is not a product of conscious deliberation. Most
follows the structure of habit or routine. For example, you probably
bathe in a predictable way---soaping up various body parts in the same
order most every time. We have morning rituals, bedtime rituals, and
work rituals that gently dictate how we approach most of our recurring
activities.

Similarly, the way you run meetings, make group decisions, interview job
candidates, and so forth probably follows a process---either tacitly or
explicitly. In organizations we call these routines *processes*. No
organization would ever achieve any level of efficiency and coordination
if groups did not evolve processes for getting things done.

Sometimes the easiest way to lead change is to change a process,
routine, or ritual. Simply embedding a vital behavior into an existing
process can dramatically change outcomes. For example, years ago we
found that medical errors are often the consequence of silence.
Altogether too often a surgeon might be preparing to close a patient
when a nurse notices that the clamp count is off. In other words, the
surgeon might have left something inside the patient that could cause
problems later. Our study found that far too often the nurse and others
on the team say nothing in these crucial
moments.[^12^](#notes.xhtml#r_ch8notes12){#ch8.xhtml#ch8notes12}
Fortunately, in the years since that study was published, great efforts
have been taken to influence change. One surprisingly effective
intervention involves simply adding one step to the medical procedure:
asking the members of the team to introduce themselves! This little
process tweak strengthens psychological safety and pulls each team
member out of anonymity, which increases the likelihood that team
members will catch and call out potential
errors.[^13^](#notes.xhtml#r_ch8notes13){#ch8.xhtml#ch8notes13} In
addition, research shows that following a checklist significantly
improves outcomes and reduces
errors.[^14^](#notes.xhtml#r_ch8notes14){#ch8.xhtml#ch8notes14} Now,
let's be clear, there's a big difference between announcing a checklist
and influencing all of your surgical teams to use it! That's where other
sources of influence come into []{#ch8.xhtml#page_197
type="pagebreak"}play. But structuring a new behavior into a process is
a potent part of the influence effort.

Consistent outcomes typically come from consistent behavior. And
consistent behavior is often guided by the processes we follow. So, if
you don't like your outcomes, take a look at your processes. For
example, decades ago, symphony orchestras began to confront the
tremendous gender inequity among their musicians. Not only were they
hiring men at much higher rates than women, but the men had exclusive
hold on coveted leadership positions. Many excused the inequity by
claiming the results were the inevitable outcome of a merit-based
audition process. Expert judges listened objectively to competing
performers, they argued, and the results were the results. This logic
held until a number of orchestras tried a new process. They instituted
"blind" auditions in which the candidate performed behind a screen,
hidden from view. This practice immediately led to a 30 percent increase
in female new
hires.[^15^](#notes.xhtml#r_ch8notes15){#ch8.xhtml#ch8notes15} Changing
the process kept the focus solely on factors that should influence the
final decision and removed those that shouldn't.

In our home lives, processes take the form of rituals. Rituals are often
unconscious---we simply evolve a habit for carrying out recurring tasks.
If you're trying to improve some result in your personal life, finding a
daily ritual you can attach a new activity to can accelerate change over
trying to treat it as a stand-alone task. For example, a friend
dramatically improved feelings of warmth and connection in his home by
adding one simple step to his "coming home" ritual. That ritual used to
involve driving home from the office in stressful traffic, ruminating
over everything that had gone wrong at work, then rushing into the house
distracted and tense. That emotional noise usually set the tone for his
first encounter with his family. To change this, he placed a sticker of
a cloud on his steering wheel that reminded him to add a key step to his
"coming home" ritual: after parking his car, he took himself through a
two-minute meditation that helped him transition from work to family.
[]{#ch8.xhtml#page_198 type="pagebreak"}The new procedure helped him
walk into his home more calm, grateful, and present.

A good influence plan should consider relevant processes and policies
that make vital behaviors harder or negative behaviors easier. Sometimes
eliminating steps, simplifying decision-making, or delegating authority
can dramatically change behavior. Changing processes can have a big
impact on helping people behave in ways that improve results and align
with their values.

### SUMMARY: STRUCTURAL ABILITY {.h3}

Many of us are environmentally incompetent---we fail to recognize the
subtle but powerful pull of our physical and virtual environments on our
behaviors. Given that *things* are far easier to change than *people*
and that these things can have a permanent impact on how people behave,
it's high time we pick up on the lead of Whyte, Steele, Wansink, and
others and add the power of the space we inhabit to our influence
repertoire.

**1.**   **Add a cue.** Use cues to prompt attention at the moment a new
behavior is needed.

**2.**   **Change the data stream.** Influence hearts and minds by
exposing people to information that helps them see what happens when
vital behaviors are and are not practiced.

**3.**   **Promote propinquity.** Use distance to shape choices.

**4.**   **Make it easy.** Do all you can to make the behavior
reasonably easy and obvious.

**5.**   **Change a process.** Where possible, build the new behavior
into policies and processes.

When you get source 6 on your side, you gain a sleepless ally to
influence change for good.

[]{#ch9.xhtml}

[]{#ch9.xhtml#page_199 type="pagebreak"}9 {#ch9.xhtml#ch9 .h2n}
-----------------------------------------

BECOME A LEADER {.h2t}
---------------

*The greatest hope for solving every significant problem we face as a
planet is for more people to become influential leaders.*

This book started with a bold assertion. We claimed that if you bundle
the right number and type of influences into a robust influence
strategy, you can create rapid, profound, and lasting change. We shared
research that suggests you can amplify your influence tenfold if you
follow the principles practiced by effective leaders around the world.
And finally, we offered not just to help you *do* a few things better,
we held out hope that *Crucial Influence* skills would improve the way
you *think* about every influence challenge you face.

The next time you struggle to find a way to influence change, we hope
you'll default to using *the three keys to influence.* Simply ponder and
answer the crucial questions:

**1.**   What *result* do I want? And how will I measure progress?

**2.**   What *vital behaviors* are key to achieving that result?

**3.**   []{#ch9.xhtml#page_200 type="pagebreak"}How do I enlist a
critical mass of the *six sources of influence* to support the vital
behaviors?

With these crucial questions at the top of your mind, your confidence in
facing influence problems should increase. You know the basic building
blocks you'll need to assemble an effective strategy.

You now also know how to think about the full variety of influences
behind every behavior that concerns you.

First, you'll diagnose your vital behaviors by examining each of the
*six sources of influence.*

Next, you'll determine which sources are getting in the way of change by
asking questions like those shown.

![Images](Grenny_0901.jpg)

Questions for the Six Sources of Influence

[]{#ch9.xhtml#page_201 type="pagebreak"}The magnitude of your influence
depends on the quality of your diagnosis. As you carefully study all of
the factors that impede change, you'll be more likely to create an
influence strategy that promotes change.

Finally, you'll use the tactics you've learned in each chapter to
assemble enough of the six sources to make change the path of least
resistance. You now know how to *overdetermine* change.

### A POWERFUL MULTIPURPOSE TOOL {.h3}

There's nothing more empowering than a multipurpose tool. In the three
key questions and the Six Sources of Influence, you have a tool robust
enough to help you think about everything from your fitness goals to
customer retention worries to your water-balloon-throwing teen. And as
we'll see in the next example, if you happen to leave this book lying
around your home, it might even help your college-age son get his
fraternity brothers to open their wallets.

College freshman Daniel Nix had a clear desired result in mind as he
approached the end of his first semester: raise \$300 from his
university Greek house to decorate for the holidays. Daniel adores the
holidays and wanted to make his first Christmas away from home cheery.
Full of youthful optimism, he set a five-gallon bucket in the house's
cafeteria and labeled it "Christmas Light Donations." Then he waited for
the money to flow. Three days later he had a grand total of \$20 and a
gum wrapper in the bucket.

On a visit home he happened across his dad's copy of this book. He spent
the weekend devouring it, then confronted his problem with optimism
borne of a new way of thinking.

Reading the book didn't change his desired result. \$300 was the goal.
Nor did it take a lot of thought to decide how to measure progress or
identify a vital behavior: he wanted his housemates to cough up
cash---electronically or physically.

[]{#ch9.xhtml#page_202 type="pagebreak"}The breakthrough came as he
examined his problem through all six sources of influence and did his
best to craft an idea or two from each. Among other things, he decorated
the five-gallon bucket in Christmas glory in order to make the pitch
easier to see, and to connect to emotions that would promote
participation (sources 1 and 6). He posted an enormous picture of
Santa's piercing eyes above the bucket, giving the impression that he
would know if you were naughty or nice (source 3). He gamified the
challenge by displaying a large thermometer displaying progress toward
the goal (sources 1 and 6). And he posted the names and donation amounts
of everyone who had contributed next to the thermometer (source 3).

Within 48 hours Daniel exceeded his goal. There's nothing more
empowering than a multipurpose tool. When you get better at thinking
about influence, you get better at leading change.

### A FEW WARNINGS {.h3}

We'll conclude by sharing two of the most common ways we've seen leaders
go wrong when attempting to apply what you now know. These include,
ironically, both *overthinking* and *underthinking* influence. Let's
take a look at these two traps in turn.

#### Overthinking {.h4}

While we encourage leaders to consider every source of influence as they
build an influence plan, not all circumstances require a full six-source
campaign.

If you're not up against a great deal of resistance, you may not need to
overthink the problem. It could be that simply throwing one or two more
sources of influence at the behavior will invite change.

Similarly, if the risk of failure is low, you don't need to conduct an
elaborate diagnosis, then deliberate at length about influence options.
[]{#ch9.xhtml#page_203 type="pagebreak"}Just use the Crucial Influence
model to brainstorm some possibilities and see what happens.

For example, one of the authors was able to exercise more consistently
by simply putting his exercise clothes and shoes on a chair by his bed
(source 6). He suspected that if he immediately dressed for a run when
he woke in the morning, he might run more consistently. And it worked.
Had it not worked, he wouldn't have lost much in the experiment. He
could have stepped back at that point and taken a more serious look at
ways of engaging more sources of influence.

If the need for change is neither terribly urgent nor dangerously
important, just run a few experiments by tweaking a source of influence
or two. It's better in these cases to get started and adjust a couple of
times than waste time as you overthink the problem.

#### Underthinking {.h4}

On the flip side of overthinking, sometimes people don't give influence
enough thought. You can do this in one of two ways. Ironically, you can
make this mistake with either big or small problems. Underthinking also
often shows up in the form of *thrifting.*

##### Small Problems {.h5}

Sometimes readers get less than the full value of their investment in
this book because they mistakenly conclude that its primary value is for
solving big, hairy, overwhelming problems. If "curing a pandemic" isn't
on their to-do list for the week, they set what they've learned aside.

Don't make that mistake! Recall the dozens of examples we've shared of
deft use of key ideas in-the-moment. These leaders didn't need to solve
big problems, but they thought more carefully about even their small
problems in ways that made them far more effective. Developing the
discipline of considering all of the sources of influence amplifies your
leadership with even everyday challenges.

[]{#ch9.xhtml#page_204 type="pagebreak"}For example, when you're
counseling one of your children, watch for your tendency to treat
ability problems (sources 2, 4, and 6) as motivation problems. When
you're writing a memo that demands action, use a story (source 1) to
help people connect with a more motivating moral frame. When you're
setting up a room for a meeting, think about how the layout of the room
(source 6) will influence behavior. Next time you send people off to
training (source 2), consider adding some social influence (sources 3
and 4) by meeting with them before and after to support their action
plans.

Don't miss the hundreds of opportunities life presents to you to think
and act more intentionally about influence. A little more thought can
lead to a lot more influence.

##### Thrifting {.h5}

It's not uncommon when we get to the end of a lecture on the six-source
model to have an executive raise their hand and ask something like,
"Which source of influence is the most important?" When this question
comes up, we panic.

This question betrays a worrisome misunderstanding of the entire message
of this book. Our goal has been to give you a proper appreciation of how
all the sources of influence shape behavior. To us, asking, "Which is
most important?" is like asking, "Which major human organ is most
important? Heart? Lungs? Brain? Can you prioritize those for me?"

The Six-Sources of Influence is a model of systemic influence. Each
source interacts with others to produce action, and each may affect some
people more than others. That's why our overriding message is that if
change is important, your goal should be to *overdetermine* success.

But that's not the way things work in most organizations. Because
they're used to striving for efficiency, most leaders ask, "What's the
least we can do to get results?"

If you begin an influence effort with "thrifting" in mind, you're likely
to fail.

[]{#ch9.xhtml#page_205 type="pagebreak"}Many of the great leaders you've
learned about here are familiar with this concern. People make
pilgrimages to visit with Martha Swai, Dr. Don Berwick, Dr. Wiwat
Rojanapithayakorn, Dave Durocher, and others to learn the secrets to
their success. Then rather than look at all of the sources of influence
these highly influential leaders have employed, these naive people
scrounge for one or two silver bullets to cobble onto their existing
efforts in hopes of putting them over the top.

They attach a Ferrari hood ornament to their 1974 Pinto wagon and wait
for heads to turn. But they don't. It's still a Pinto.

For example, civic and police leaders have descended on North Carolina
to learn about the "Second Chance" strategy we describe in [Chapter
7](#ch7.xhtml#ch7). After studying the strategy's complex system for
influencing change, these leadership tourists often focus solely on the
made-for-TV meetings where soon-to-be-arrested drug dealers are brought
into a room filled with pictures of themselves committing crimes. Surely
that is the "most important" part of the influence strategy, right? So
they fly back home, identify their most notorious offenders, gather the
evidence, produce the video, and host the party. And re-offense rates
don't change one iota.

Why? If you think about that question through the framework of the six
sources, you'll see that such an approach neglects every other source of
influence that is embedded in the Second Chance strategy.

Might you need more than a terrifying confrontation with a district
attorney to help someone fundamentally change decades-long criminal
behaviors? The North Carolina effort engages not just fear of
consequences, but family support (sources 3 and 4), job training (source
2), scholarship incentives (source 5), peer influence (sources 3 and 4),
relocation (source 6), and much more.

Designers of the Second Chance program went to great pains to ensure
that all six sources of influence are incorporated into their efforts.
But "thrifters" want to treat the influence effort like a box of
chocolates and simply pick their favorites.

##### []{#ch9.xhtml#page_206 type="pagebreak"}Diagnose to Overcome Thrifting {.h5}

Over the years we've found that leaders are less likely to fall prey to
thrifting if they've thoroughly diagnosed the problem. If they've
gathered data about how well (or poorly) *all* sources of influence are
aligned with the behaviors they hope to foster, they create more
realistic influence plans.

Dr. Warren Warwick of the University of Minnesota Medical Center in
Fairview offered a great example of how good diagnosis leads to
effective leadership. Warwick treated patients with cystic fibrosis
(CF). CF is a genetic condition that causes the body to produce thick,
sticky mucus in places like the lungs or digestive tract that should
instead have slippery, flexible protective coatings. Left untreated,
sufferers risk compromised breathing and malnutrition as the dense
material inhibits functioning of both lungs and digestive tracts.
Unfortunately, treatments can be not only inconvenient, but painful. For
example, buildup in the lungs might need to be broken down using a
process of aggressive massage.

Warwick often faced patients who were failing to practice lifesaving
behaviors. Over time, he came to realize that the effectiveness of his
medical skills depended on his proficiency at influence. This insight
prompted him to develop a discipline of diagnosis---not just of the
disease, but of the sources of influence his patients confronted when
attempting to follow his advice.

For example, one day Dr. Warwick sat with an 18-year-old CF patient who
wasn't conforming to her treatment plan. Rather than launch into a
lecture about how she would suffocate in a few years (source 1: an
attempt to motivate compliance) if she continued to slack off, Dr.
Warwick stopped and diagnosed *all* the underlying causes. As he
listened, he gained a humbling appreciation for her lapses.

The patient had a new boyfriend with whom she was staying half the time.
Her mother had typically administered treatments, but now the daughter
was often not at home at the prescribed times (a loss
[]{#ch9.xhtml#page_207 type="pagebreak"}of sources 3 and 4). The patient
had also started a job and was working nights (a source 6 schedule
change). The school she attended had changed policies and now required a
nurse to administer her medicine (a policy that introduced a source 6
barrier). Deciding that this was a pain, she stopped taking her
medicine.

In spite of having lost 20 percent of her lung capacity in the previous
two months, she felt fine and concluded that fewer treatments were OK (a
possible source 1 motivation for compliance wasn't proving effective).

The more Dr. Warwick listened to the patient, the more he appreciated
that her situation was complex, and the less tempted he was to thrift
his influence by simply putting the fear of death into her. He and the
patient jointly developed a plan to overcome obstacles and literally
saved her life.

Good diagnosis leads to effective influence by revealing the humbling
complexity of human behavior.

### CONTINUE YOUR LEARNING {.h3}

We wish you the best in your efforts to become a better leader. As we
said in [Chapter 1](#ch1.xhtml#ch1), leadership is intentional
influence. It is the systematic process of influencing human behavior to
achieve great things. The greatest hope for solving every significant
problem we face as a planet is for more people to become influential
leaders.

We hope your investment in studying this book produces tremendous
returns in your effort to offer positive influence in the world. Whether
your efforts improve the quality of your own life, boost your company's
success, or bless lives in your community, we applaud you for becoming
part of the noble work of those you've met in these pages.

We also hope that the framework we've offered motivates you to
*continue* your learning. While we've described potent influence tactics
within each of the sources, we have by no means exhausted the ways you
[]{#ch9.xhtml#page_208 type="pagebreak"}can engage any of them. New
findings are published every day for how to help people find more
personal motivation, exert social influence, and reshape environments to
foster positive change. Keep learning!

::: {.sidebar}
*Watch a short video where author Joseph Grenny shares how to use your
new skills to influence those in your organization. See it at
[CrucialInfluence.com](http://CrucialInfluence.com).*
:::

To help, we invite you to visit
[CrucialInfluence.com](http://CrucialInfluence.com). There you'll find
great learning aids, including:

•   The Crucial Influence assessment that not only gives you a view into
your existing influence strengths and weaknesses but can also help you
develop the next steps for becoming an effective influencer

•   Discussion questions you can use with your book club or reading
group

•   The Six Sources of Influence model

•   Videos of interviews with some of the leaders you've met in this
book

•   Case studies of organizations that have used the Crucial Influence
model to great success

•   A free subscription to the *Crucial Skills* newsletter, a Q&A column
that addresses tough interpersonal and organizational challenges

As Margaret Mead once said, "Never doubt that a small group of
thoughtful, committed citizens can change the world; indeed, it is the
only thing that ever has."

Best wishes in your efforts to become a more thoughtful and effective
leader.

[]{#notes.xhtml}

[]{#notes.xhtml#page_209 type="pagebreak"}NOTES {#notes.xhtml#notes .h2}
-----------------------------------------------

##### Chapter 1 {.h5}

[1](#ch1.xhtml#ch1notes1){#notes.xhtml#r_ch1notes1}.   Sedaris, D.
(2009). *Naked*. Little, Brown and Company. p. 215.

##### Chapter 2 {.h5}

[1](#ch2.xhtml#ch2notes1){#notes.xhtml#r_ch2notes1}.   Gauggel, S., and
Billino, J. (2002). "The Effects of Goal Setting on the Arithmetic
Performance of Brain-Damaged Patients." *Archives of Clinical
Neuropsychology* 17, no. 3: 283--294,
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0887617701001135>.
This German study has shown that even brain-damaged patients perform
arithmetic better when they have been given a clear and challenging goal
than when they have been given a vague "do your best" challenge. Also
see Gellatly, I. R., and Meyer, J. P. (1992). "The Effects of Goal
Difficulty on Physiological Arousal, Cognition, and Task Performance."
*Journal of Applied Psychology* 77, no. 5: 694--704,
https://doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.77.5.694,
http://psycnet.apa.org/journals/apl/77/5/694/. This study has shown the
presence of a challenging goal has both cognitive and behavioral
effects, including heart rate.

[2](#ch2.xhtml#ch2notes2){#notes.xhtml#r_ch2notes2}.   In previous
editions of this book we highlighted the case of Delancey Street
Foundation in San Francisco led by Mimi Silbert. The authors were so
struck with what she had accomplished, but disappointed with how little
replication there had been of the model that in 2015 they funded and led
an effort to spur more adoption and innovation. As of the writing of
this book, in addition to the flagship campus of The Other Side Academy
in Salt Lake City, Utah, there are five other successful campuses with
more in the planning stages. Information is available at
[TheOtherSideAcademy.com](http://TheOtherSideAcademy.com).

[3](#ch2.xhtml#ch2notes3){#notes.xhtml#r_ch2notes3}.   McKane, S.
(2021). "The Other Side Academy Helping Former Addicts and Criminals
Turn Their Lives Around," Fox 13, Salt Lake City.
[]{#notes.xhtml#page_210
type="pagebreak"}<https://www.fox13now.com/news/local-news/the-other-side-academy-helping-former-addicts-and-criminals-turn-their-lives-around>.

[4](#ch2.xhtml#ch2notes4){#notes.xhtml#r_ch2notes4}.   Grenny, J.
(2008). "Influencer: The Power to Change Anything." *MIT Sloan
Management Review*, 49(2), 60--67.

##### Part II {.h5}

[1](#part2.xhtml#part2notes1){#notes.xhtml#r_part2notes1}.   Mencken, H.
L. (1920). *Prejudices: Second Series*. Alfred A. Knopf. p. 158.

##### Chapter 3 {.h5}

[1](#ch3.xhtml#ch3notes1){#notes.xhtml#r_ch3notes1}.   Haidt, J. (2006).
*The Happiness Hypothesis: Finding Modern Truth in Ancient* Wisdom.
Basic Books.

##### Chapter 4 {.h5}

[1](#ch4.xhtml#ch4notes1){#notes.xhtml#r_ch4notes1}.   Dweck, C. (2006).
*Mindset: The New Psychology of Success*. Random House.

[2](#ch4.xhtml#ch4notes2){#notes.xhtml#r_ch4notes2}.   Mischel, W.,
Shoda, Y., and Rodriguez, M. L. (1989). "Delay of Gratification in
Children." *Science* 244(4907), 933--938.

[3](#ch4.xhtml#ch4notes3){#notes.xhtml#r_ch4notes3}.   Bandura, A., and
Mischel, W. (1966). "Moral Reasoning and Vicarious Learning." *Journal
of Abnormal and Social Psychology* 63(2), 311--318.

[4](#ch4.xhtml#ch4notes4){#notes.xhtml#r_ch4notes4}.   Ericsson, K. A.,
Krampe, R. T., and Tesch-Römer, C. (1993). "The Role of Deliberate
Practice in the Acquisition of Expert Performance." *Psychological
Review*, 100(3), 363--406.

[5](#ch4.xhtml#ch4notes5){#notes.xhtml#r_ch4notes5}.   Maxfield, D.,
Grenny, J., McMillan, R., Patterson, K., and Switzler, A. (2005).
"Silence Kills: The Seven Crucial Conversations for Healthcare."
*Journal of Patient Safety* 1(2), 7--16.

##### Chapter 5 {.h5}

[1](#ch5.xhtml#ch5notes1){#notes.xhtml#r_ch5notes1}.   Milgram, S.
(1963). "Behavioral Study of Obedience." *Journal of Abnormal and Social
Psychology*, 67(4), 371--378.

[2](#ch5.xhtml#ch5notes2){#notes.xhtml#r_ch5notes2}.   Maxfield, D.,
Grenny, J., McMillan, R., Patterson, K., and Switzler, A. (2005).
"Silence Kills: The Seven Crucial Conversations for Healthcare."
*Journal of Patient Safety* 1(2), 7--16.

##### Chapter 6 {.h5}

[1](#ch6.xhtml#ch6notes1){#notes.xhtml#r_ch6notes1}.   Wansink, B., and
Cheney, M. M. (2005). "Super Bowls: Serving Bowl Size and Food
Consumption." *JAMA* 293(14), 1727--1728.

[2](#ch6.xhtml#ch6notes2){#notes.xhtml#r_ch6notes2}.   Gneezy, U.,
Haruvy, E., and Yafe, H. (2004). "The Inefficiency of Splitting the
Bill," *The Economic Journal* 114, no. 495: 265--280,
https://doiorg/10.1111/j.1468-0297.2004.00209.x.

[3](#ch6.xhtml#ch6notes3){#notes.xhtml#r_ch6notes3}.   []{#notes.xhtml#page_211
type="pagebreak"}Bernick, C. L. (2001). "When Your Culture Needs a
Makeover." *Harvard Business Review*, 53--61.

[4](#ch6.xhtml#ch6notes4){#notes.xhtml#r_ch6notes4}.   <https://hopesquad.com/mission-history/>.

##### Chapter 7 {.h5}

[1](#ch7.xhtml#ch7notes1){#notes.xhtml#r_ch7notes1}.   Sloman, S., and
Fernbach, P. (2017) *The Knowledge Illusion: Why We Never Think Alone*.
Riverhead Books.

[2](#ch7.xhtml#ch7notes2){#notes.xhtml#r_ch7notes2}.   Lepper, M. R.,
Greene, D., and Nisbett, R. E. (1973). "Undermining Children's Intrinsic
Interest with Extrinsic Reward: A Test of the 'Overjustification'
Hypothesis." *Journal of Personality and Social Psychology* 28(1),
129--137.

[3](#ch7.xhtml#ch7notes3){#notes.xhtml#r_ch7notes3}.   Higgins, S. T.,
Budney, A. J., and Bickel, W. K. (1994). "Achieving Cocaine Abstinence
with a Behavioral Approach." *Addiction* 89(11), 1541--1548.

[4](#ch7.xhtml#ch7notes4){#notes.xhtml#r_ch7notes4}.   Masaaki, I.
(1986). *Kaizen: The Key to Japan's Competitive Success*. McGraw-Hill.

[5](#ch7.xhtml#ch7notes5){#notes.xhtml#r_ch7notes5}.   <https://ncsecondchance.org/about/>.

[6](#ch7.xhtml#ch7notes6){#notes.xhtml#r_ch7notes6}.   <https://www.populationmedia.org/stories/spotlight-dr-negussie-teffera>.

##### Chapter 8 {.h5}

[1](#ch8.xhtml#ch8notes1){#notes.xhtml#r_ch8notes1}.   Whyte, W. F.
(1948). "Human Relations in the Restaurant Industry." *Harvard Business
Review* 26(5), 367--376.

[2](#ch8.xhtml#ch8notes2){#notes.xhtml#r_ch8notes2}.   Speer, A. (1970).
*Inside the Third Reich: Memoirs*. Macmillan.

[3](#ch8.xhtml#ch8notes3){#notes.xhtml#r_ch8notes3}.   Kelling, G. L.,
and Coles, C. M. (2006). *Fixing Broken Windows: Restoring Order and
Reducing Crime in Our Communities*. Simon and Schuster,.

[4](#ch8.xhtml#ch8notes4){#notes.xhtml#r_ch8notes4}.   Wansink, B.
(2006). *Mindless Eating: Why We Eat More Than We Think*. Bantam Books.

[5](#ch8.xhtml#ch8notes5){#notes.xhtml#r_ch8notes5}.   Wansink, B.
(2004). "Environmental Factors That Increase the Food Intake and
Consumption Volume of Unknowing Consumers." *Annual Review of Nutrition*
24(1), 455--479.

[6](#ch8.xhtml#ch8notes6){#notes.xhtml#r_ch8notes6}.   Levinson, M.
(2006). "The Box That Changed the World." *Harvard Business Review*
84(3), 62--77.

[7](#ch8.xhtml#ch8notes7){#notes.xhtml#r_ch8notes7}.   Hanauer, J.
(2001). *Civic Culture and Urban Change: Governing Dallas*. University
Press of Kansas.
<https://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/17/opinion/the-art-of-changing-a-city.html>.

[8](#ch8.xhtml#ch8notes8){#notes.xhtml#r_ch8notes8}.   Festinger, L.,
Schachter, S., and Back, K. (1950). *Social Pressures in Informal
Groups: A Study of Human Factors in Housing*. Harper.

[9](#ch8.xhtml#ch8notes9){#notes.xhtml#r_ch8notes9}.   Allen, T. J.
(1977). "Managing the Flow of Technology: Technology Transfer and the
Dissemination of Technological Information within the R&D Organization."
*Administrative Science Quarterly* 22(2), 242--263.

[10](#ch8.xhtml#ch8notes10){#notes.xhtml#r_ch8notes10}.   []{#notes.xhtml#page_212
type="pagebreak"}Makary, M. A., and Daniel, M. (2016). "Medical
Error---the Third Leading Cause of Death in the US." *BMJ Quality &
Safety* 25(10), 726--732.

[11](#ch8.xhtml#ch8notes11){#notes.xhtml#r_ch8notes11}.   Underhill, P.
(1999). *Why We Buy: The Science of Shopping*. Simon & Schuster.

[12](#ch8.xhtml#ch8notes12){#notes.xhtml#r_ch8notes12}.   Maxfield, D.
G., Grenny, J., McMillan, R., Patterson, K., and Switzler, A. (2005).
"Silence Kills: Seven Crucial Conversations in Healthcare." Patient
Safety Network.
<https://psnet.ahrq.gov/issue/silence-kills-seven-crucial-conversations-healthcare>.

[13](#ch8.xhtml#ch8notes13){#notes.xhtml#r_ch8notes13}.   Gawande, A.
*The Checklist Manifesto*, A 2008 study for surgical patients in eight
hospitals showed that those who used a surgical procedure requiring
personal introductions had 36 percent fewer major complications. Deaths
fell 47 percent.

[14](#ch8.xhtml#ch8notes14){#notes.xhtml#r_ch8notes14}.   Haynes A.B.,
Weiser T.G., Lipsitz S.R., et al. (2009). "A Surgical Safety Checklist
to Reduce Morbidity and Mortality in a Global Population." *N Engl J
Med*. 360(5): 491--499.
<https://www.hsph.harvard.edu/news/features/ellner-surgical-safety-checklist-and-training-lowers-complications/>.

[15](#ch8.xhtml#ch8notes15){#notes.xhtml#r_ch8notes15}.   Goldin, C.,
and Rouse, C. (2000). "Orchestrating Impartiality: The Impact of 'Blind'
Auditions on Female Musicians." *American Economic Review* 90(4),
715--741.
<https://gap.hks.harvard.edu/orchestrating-impartiality-impact-%E2%80%9Cblind%E2%80%9D-auditions-female-musicians>.

[]{#index.xhtml}

[]{#index.xhtml#page_213 type="pagebreak"}INDEX {#index.xhtml#index .h2}
-----------------------------------------------

Ability

barriers to, [77](#ch4.xhtml#page_77), [83](#ch4.xhtml#page_83),
[90](#ch4.xhtml#page_90)

discipline and, [78](#ch4.xhtml#page_78)--80, [83](#ch4.xhtml#page_83)

edge of, [85](#ch4.xhtml#page_85)--86

motivation and, [43](#part2.xhtml#page_43)--44

personal, [38](#ch2.xhtml#page_38), [77](#ch4.xhtml#page_77)--79,
[92](#ch4.xhtml#page_92)

skills and, [88](#ch4.xhtml#page_88)

social, [39](#ch2.xhtml#page_39), [125](#ch6.xhtml#page_125),
[148](#ch6.xhtml#page_148)

structural, [39](#ch2.xhtml#page_39), [179](#ch8.xhtml#page_179)--182,
[198](#ch8.xhtml#page_198)

Accomplishments, [8](#ch1.xhtml#page_8), [12](#ch1.xhtml#page_12),
[73](#ch3.xhtml#page_73)

recognition for, [51](#ch3.xhtml#page_51), [64](#ch3.xhtml#page_64),
[118](#ch5.xhtml#page_118), [159](#ch7.xhtml#page_159),
[163](#ch7.xhtml#page_163)

Accountability, [168](#ch7.xhtml#page_168)--169

measurement and, [26](#ch2.xhtml#page_26)--28

peer, [33](#ch2.xhtml#page_33), [87](#ch4.xhtml#page_87),
[114](#ch5.xhtml#page_114)--117, [122](#ch5.xhtml#page_122)

200 percent, [33](#ch2.xhtml#page_33), [118](#ch5.xhtml#page_118)--121

for vital behaviors, [120](#ch5.xhtml#page_120)--121

Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)

Center for the Prevention and Control of, [11](#ch1.xhtml#page_11)

social science and, [145](#ch6.xhtml#page_145)

in Tanzania, [68](#ch3.xhtml#page_68)--70

transmission of, [145](#ch6.xhtml#page_145)--147

Act Like an Influencer

cues and, [179](#ch8.xhtml#page_179)

data stream and, [183](#ch8.xhtml#page_183)

direct experience and, [62](#ch3.xhtml#page_62)--65,
[91](#ch4.xhtml#page_91)

incentives and, [156](#ch7.xhtml#page_156), [161](#ch7.xhtml#page_161),
[164](#ch7.xhtml#page_164)

physical environment and, [190](#ch8.xhtml#page_190)

social ability and, [142](#ch6.xhtml#page_142),
[144](#ch6.xhtml#page_144)

social motivation and, [101](#ch5.xhtml#page_101),
[112](#ch5.xhtml#page_112)

vital behavior and, [34](#ch2.xhtml#page_34)

Action, attention and, [28](#ch2.xhtml#page_28)--29

Addiction

incentives and, [157](#ch7.xhtml#page_157)--158,
[163](#ch7.xhtml#page_163)

interventions and, [56](#ch3.xhtml#page_56)--57

AIDS. *See* Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome

Alberto Culver, [137](#ch6.xhtml#page_137)

Ambivalence, apathy compared to, [54](#ch3.xhtml#page_54)--58,
[71](#ch3.xhtml#page_71)

American Express, [62](#ch3.xhtml#page_62)--63

Apathy, ambivalence compared to, [54](#ch3.xhtml#page_54)--58,
[71](#ch3.xhtml#page_71)

Apology, trust and, [103](#ch5.xhtml#page_103)--107

Army, US, [27](#ch2.xhtml#page_27)--28

Assessment, Crucial Influence, [47](#part2.xhtml#page_47),
[208](#ch9.xhtml#page_208)

Assumptions, about care, [53](#ch3.xhtml#page_53)--54

Attention

action and, [28](#ch2.xhtml#page_28)--29

information and, [181](#ch8.xhtml#page_181)--182

Attitudes, [27](#ch2.xhtml#page_27), [51](#ch3.xhtml#page_51),
[168](#ch7.xhtml#page_168), [175](#ch8.xhtml#page_175)

Bacon, Roger, [84](#ch4.xhtml#page_84)

Bandura, Albert, [28](#ch2.xhtml#page_28)--29,
[65](#ch3.xhtml#page_65)--67, [82](#ch4.xhtml#page_82)

Bangkok, Thailand, [11](#ch1.xhtml#page_11)

Bangladesh, [129](#ch6.xhtml#page_129)--130

dowry in, [189](#ch8.xhtml#page_189)--190

[]{#index.xhtml#page_214 type="pagebreak"}Barriers, to ability,
[77](#ch4.xhtml#page_77), [83](#ch4.xhtml#page_83),
[90](#ch4.xhtml#page_90)

Bell Labs, [184](#ch8.xhtml#page_184)--185

Bernick, Carol, [137](#ch6.xhtml#page_137)

Berres, Jennifer, [35](#ch2.xhtml#page_35)

Berwick, Don, [60](#ch3.xhtml#page_60)--62,
[204](#ch9.xhtml#page_204)--205

IHI and, [23](#ch2.xhtml#page_23)--24, [110](#ch5.xhtml#page_110)

Bias, influence, [18](#ch2.xhtml#page_18),
[42](#part2.xhtml#page_42)--43

Block, Peter, [55](#ch3.xhtml#page_55)

Bogotá, Colombia, [12](#ch1.xhtml#page_12)

water shortage in, [179](#ch8.xhtml#page_179)

Boyle, Tom, [147](#ch6.xhtml#page_147)

Bride abduction, in Ethiopia, [167](#ch7.xhtml#page_167)--168

British Telecom, [147](#ch6.xhtml#page_147)

"Broken windows theory," [174](#ch8.xhtml#page_174)--175

Burkina Faso, Guinea worm disease in, [182](#ch8.xhtml#page_182)

Burt, Martín, [24](#ch2.xhtml#page_24)--25

California, [187](#ch8.xhtml#page_187)

San Francisco, [209](#notes.xhtml#page_209)

Candor, [112](#ch5.xhtml#page_112)--113

norms and, [120](#ch5.xhtml#page_120)

permission and, [135](#ch6.xhtml#page_135)--136

social ability and, [132](#ch6.xhtml#page_132)

support of, [100](#ch5.xhtml#page_100)--101

Capital

financial, [128](#ch6.xhtml#page_128)--131

self-employment and, [129](#ch6.xhtml#page_129)--130

social, [125](#ch6.xhtml#page_125), [132](#ch6.xhtml#page_132)

Care, [51](#ch3.xhtml#page_51)--52

assumptions about, [53](#ch3.xhtml#page_53)--54

direct experience and, [64](#ch3.xhtml#page_64)

Carter, Jimmy, [180](#ch8.xhtml#page_180)--181

Carter Center, [20](#ch2.xhtml#page_20), [111](#ch5.xhtml#page_111),
[180](#ch8.xhtml#page_180)--181, [191](#ch8.xhtml#page_191)

Case study, [208](#ch9.xhtml#page_208). *See also* Study

Gallery Furniture, [88](#ch4.xhtml#page_88)

Gold Fields, [114](#ch5.xhtml#page_114)

of KIPP schools, [36](#ch2.xhtml#page_36)

Categories, of influence, [42](#part2.xhtml#page_42)--47

Causes, of behavior, [44](#part2.xhtml#page_44),
[47](#part2.xhtml#page_47)

Center for the Prevention and Control of AIDS, [11](#ch1.xhtml#page_11)

CF. *See* Cystic fibrosis

Chain of command, [108](#ch5.xhtml#page_108)

Challenges, [8](#ch1.xhtml#page_8)--9

everyday, [203](#ch9.xhtml#page_203)--204

goals and, [72](#ch3.xhtml#page_72)--73, [209](#notes.xhtml#page_209)

to understanding, [77](#ch4.xhtml#page_77)--78

Choice, [155](#ch7.xhtml#page_155)--156, [158](#ch7.xhtml#page_158)--159

coercion and, [59](#ch3.xhtml#page_59)--60

consequences of, [61](#ch3.xhtml#page_61)--62

environments and, [175](#ch8.xhtml#page_175)

reframe of behavior and, [55](#ch3.xhtml#page_55)--60

vital behaviors and, [59](#ch3.xhtml#page_59)--60

Clarity

of consequences, [165](#ch7.xhtml#page_165)--166

of goals, [23](#ch2.xhtml#page_23)--25, [209](#notes.xhtml#page_209)

about vital behaviors, [33](#ch2.xhtml#page_33)

Coaching, [143](#ch6.xhtml#page_143), [145](#ch6.xhtml#page_145),
[148](#ch6.xhtml#page_148)

empowerment and, [146](#ch6.xhtml#page_146)--147

from peers, [144](#ch6.xhtml#page_144)

Code of silence

in healthcare field, [115](#ch5.xhtml#page_115),
[117](#ch5.xhtml#page_117)--118

in project management field, [116](#ch5.xhtml#page_116)

Coercion, choice and, [59](#ch3.xhtml#page_59)--60

Collaboration, [112](#ch5.xhtml#page_112)

in Bell Labs, [184](#ch8.xhtml#page_184)--185

eBay and, [14](#ch1.xhtml#page_14)

Colombia, Bogotá, [12](#ch1.xhtml#page_12), [179](#ch8.xhtml#page_179)

Command, chain of, [108](#ch5.xhtml#page_108)

Commitment, [26](#ch2.xhtml#page_26), [55](#ch3.xhtml#page_55),
[100](#ch5.xhtml#page_100), [189](#ch8.xhtml#page_189)

Communication, open, [116](#ch5.xhtml#page_116)--118

Communities, [190](#ch8.xhtml#page_190)

leadership in, [10](#ch1.xhtml#page_10)

trust of, [136](#ch6.xhtml#page_136)--137

Competence, essential, [15](#ch1.xhtml#page_15)

Competition, [73](#ch3.xhtml#page_73)

Compliance, [27](#ch2.xhtml#page_27)--28,
[206](#ch9.xhtml#page_206)--207

discipline and, [165](#ch7.xhtml#page_165)

social ability and, [143](#ch6.xhtml#page_143),
[148](#ch6.xhtml#page_148)

Connecticut, New Haven, [96](#ch5.xhtml#page_96)

[]{#index.xhtml#page_215 type="pagebreak"}Connection,
[147](#ch6.xhtml#page_147)

social influence and, [122](#ch5.xhtml#page_122)

Consequences

of choices, [61](#ch3.xhtml#page_61)--62

clarity of, [165](#ch7.xhtml#page_165)--166

Grameen Bank and, [156](#ch7.xhtml#page_156)--157

unintended, [152](#ch7.xhtml#page_152)--154,
[164](#ch7.xhtml#page_164)--165

Control, [26](#ch2.xhtml#page_26)--28

behavior change and, [66](#ch3.xhtml#page_66)--67

of rewards, [73](#ch3.xhtml#page_73)

Cornell University, [132](#ch6.xhtml#page_132)

Coronavirus. *See* Covid-19 pandemic

Corporate environment, [112](#ch5.xhtml#page_112),
[184](#ch8.xhtml#page_184)

data stream in, [182](#ch8.xhtml#page_182)

standards in, [168](#ch7.xhtml#page_168)--169

Covid-19 pandemic, [155](#ch7.xhtml#page_155)--156

healthcare field and, [34](#ch2.xhtml#page_34)--35

Crucial Influence® Model, [19](#ch2.xhtml#page_19),
[208](#ch9.xhtml#page_208)

Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly, [72](#ch3.xhtml#page_72)--73

Cues, [174](#ch8.xhtml#page_174)--175, [177](#ch8.xhtml#page_177)--179,
[198](#ch8.xhtml#page_198)

Culture, [119](#ch5.xhtml#page_119)

organizational, [7](#ch1.xhtml#page_7)--8, [28](#ch2.xhtml#page_28)--29

transformation of, [100](#ch5.xhtml#page_100)--101,
[139](#ch6.xhtml#page_139)

Customer service industry, [6](#ch1.xhtml#page_6),
[105](#ch5.xhtml#page_105)--106

deliberate practice in, [89](#ch4.xhtml#page_89)

experiences for, [4](#ch1.xhtml#page_4)--5

Cynicism, of employees, [102](#ch5.xhtml#page_102)--103,
[135](#ch6.xhtml#page_135)

Cystic fibrosis (CF), [206](#ch9.xhtml#page_206)--207

Data

diagnosis and, [206](#ch9.xhtml#page_206)

Guinea worm disease and, [180](#ch8.xhtml#page_180)--182

Data stream, [179](#ch8.xhtml#page_179)--181, [198](#ch8.xhtml#page_198)

social influence and, [182](#ch8.xhtml#page_182)

vital behaviors and, [183](#ch8.xhtml#page_183)

Deadlines, [7](#ch1.xhtml#page_7)--8

Delancey Street Foundation, San Francisco, [31](#ch2.xhtml#page_31),
[50](#ch3.xhtml#page_50), [209](#notes.xhtml#page_209)

Delayed gratification, [81](#ch4.xhtml#page_81)--82

Delegation, [198](#ch8.xhtml#page_198)

Deliberate practice, [83](#ch4.xhtml#page_83), [88](#ch4.xhtml#page_88),
[90](#ch4.xhtml#page_90)--92

in customer service, [89](#ch4.xhtml#page_89)

edge of ability and, [85](#ch4.xhtml#page_85)--86

feedback in, [84](#ch4.xhtml#page_84)--86

in healthcare field, [87](#ch4.xhtml#page_87)

Desai, Jyoti, [112](#ch5.xhtml#page_112)--113

Diagnosis, [45](#part2.xhtml#page_45)--47

data for, [206](#ch9.xhtml#page_206)

influence strategy and, [200](#ch9.xhtml#page_200)--201

thrifting and, [206](#ch9.xhtml#page_206)--207

Difficulty, [171](#ch8.xhtml#page_171), [191](#ch8.xhtml#page_191)

propinquity and, [192](#ch8.xhtml#page_192)--193

Direct experience, [60](#ch3.xhtml#page_60)--63,
[65](#ch3.xhtml#page_65), [67](#ch3.xhtml#page_67),
[91](#ch4.xhtml#page_91)

care and, [64](#ch3.xhtml#page_64)

Discipline, [81](#ch4.xhtml#page_81)--82, [164](#ch7.xhtml#page_164),
[168](#ch7.xhtml#page_168)--169, [203](#ch9.xhtml#page_203)--204

ability and, [78](#ch4.xhtml#page_78)--80, [83](#ch4.xhtml#page_83)

compliance and, [165](#ch7.xhtml#page_165)

police and, [165](#ch7.xhtml#page_165)--167

Discourse, public, [117](#ch5.xhtml#page_117)--118,
[122](#ch5.xhtml#page_122)

Disincentives, [151](#ch7.xhtml#page_151)--152

Dixon, Tori, [119](#ch5.xhtml#page_119)

Dowry, in Bangladesh, [189](#ch8.xhtml#page_189)--190

Doyle, Lisa, [13](#ch1.xhtml#page_13), [35](#ch2.xhtml#page_35)

Drivers, of behavior, [43](#part2.xhtml#page_43),
[47](#part2.xhtml#page_47)

personal and social, [44](#part2.xhtml#page_44)--46

structural, [44](#part2.xhtml#page_44)

Dubai, [112](#ch5.xhtml#page_112)

Durocher, David, [63](#ch3.xhtml#page_63)--64, [88](#ch4.xhtml#page_88),
[186](#ch8.xhtml#page_186)--188, [204](#ch9.xhtml#page_204)--205

encouragement and, [51](#ch3.xhtml#page_51),
[118](#ch5.xhtml#page_118)--121

Games and, [120](#ch5.xhtml#page_120)--121, [195](#ch8.xhtml#page_195)

vital behaviors and, [30](#ch2.xhtml#page_30)--33

Dweck, Carol, [79](#ch4.xhtml#page_79)--80

"Each One Teach One," [33](#ch2.xhtml#page_33)

Early adopters, as opinion leaders, [110](#ch5.xhtml#page_110)

Ease, [171](#ch8.xhtml#page_171), [190](#ch8.xhtml#page_190)--192,
[198](#ch8.xhtml#page_198)

propinquity and, [193](#ch8.xhtml#page_193)

[]{#index.xhtml#page_216 type="pagebreak"}Eating decisions,
[175](#ch8.xhtml#page_175)--176

eBay, [14](#ch1.xhtml#page_14)

Economy, change of, [151](#ch7.xhtml#page_151)--152

Edge, of ability, in deliberate practice, [85](#ch4.xhtml#page_85)--86

Effect

overjustification, [154](#ch7.xhtml#page_154)

undesired, [164](#ch7.xhtml#page_164)--165

Efficiency principles, [191](#ch8.xhtml#page_191)

Effort

to measure, [29](#ch2.xhtml#page_29)

rewards of, [162](#ch7.xhtml#page_162)--163

Ego, integrity and, [106](#ch5.xhtml#page_106)--107

Embrace, of social influence, [116](#ch5.xhtml#page_116)--117

Emery Air Freight, [178](#ch8.xhtml#page_178)

Emotions, [202](#ch9.xhtml#page_202)

Empathy

judgement compared to, [57](#ch3.xhtml#page_57)--58

moral duty and, [62](#ch3.xhtml#page_62)--63

Employees, [5](#ch1.xhtml#page_5)

cynicism of, [102](#ch5.xhtml#page_102)--103, [135](#ch6.xhtml#page_135)

Empowerment

coaching and, [146](#ch6.xhtml#page_146)--147

help and, [132](#ch6.xhtml#page_132)--133

Encouragement, [118](#ch5.xhtml#page_118)--121,
[133](#ch6.xhtml#page_133)--135

Energy sector, in Soviet Union, [152](#ch7.xhtml#page_152)--153

Enforcement, of laws and standards, [166](#ch7.xhtml#page_166)--169

Enmity, propinquity and, [187](#ch8.xhtml#page_187)--188

Entrepreneur of the Year award, Ernst and Young,
[30](#ch2.xhtml#page_30)

Entrepreneurship, [126](#ch6.xhtml#page_126)--128

poverty and, [129](#ch6.xhtml#page_129)--131

Environments

choice and, [175](#ch8.xhtml#page_175)

invisibility in, [173](#ch8.xhtml#page_173)--174,
[176](#ch8.xhtml#page_176)

physical and virtual, [171](#ch8.xhtml#page_171)--174,
[184](#ch8.xhtml#page_184)--186, [190](#ch8.xhtml#page_190)

Ericsson, Anders, [83](#ch4.xhtml#page_83)--84, [86](#ch4.xhtml#page_86)

Ernst and Young, Entrepreneur of the Year award of,
[30](#ch2.xhtml#page_30)

Error

fundamental attribution, [54](#ch3.xhtml#page_54)

medical, [196](#ch8.xhtml#page_196)

Essential competence, [15](#ch1.xhtml#page_15)

Ethiopia, bride abduction in, [167](#ch7.xhtml#page_167)--168

Everyday challenges, underthinking influence and,
[203](#ch9.xhtml#page_203)--204

Experience

customer, [4](#ch1.xhtml#page_4)--5

direct, [65](#ch3.xhtml#page_65), [67](#ch3.xhtml#page_67),
[91](#ch4.xhtml#page_91)

vicarious, [65](#ch3.xhtml#page_65)--67, [117](#ch5.xhtml#page_117)

Experiments

influence and, [202](#ch9.xhtml#page_202)--203

psychological, [80](#ch4.xhtml#page_80)--82, [99](#ch5.xhtml#page_99)

punishment in, [164](#ch7.xhtml#page_164)--165

Failure, [204](#ch9.xhtml#page_204)

to define objectives, [23](#ch2.xhtml#page_23)--25,
[86](#ch4.xhtml#page_86), [209](#notes.xhtml#page_209)

to measure, [26](#ch2.xhtml#page_26)

organizational culture and, [7](#ch1.xhtml#page_7)--8

theory of influence and, [10](#ch1.xhtml#page_10)

Family, rituals in, [188](#ch8.xhtml#page_188)--189

Farming industry, in Iowa, [108](#ch5.xhtml#page_108)--109

Feedback, [72](#ch3.xhtml#page_72)--73, [173](#ch8.xhtml#page_173)--174

in deliberate practice, [84](#ch4.xhtml#page_84)--86

from peers, [88](#ch4.xhtml#page_88)

rituals and, [195](#ch8.xhtml#page_195)--196

Feeling, frame and, [70](#ch3.xhtml#page_70)--72,
[154](#ch7.xhtml#page_154)--155

Feeney, Edward, [178](#ch8.xhtml#page_178)

Festinger, Leon, [176](#ch8.xhtml#page_176), [184](#ch8.xhtml#page_184)

Financial capital, [128](#ch6.xhtml#page_128)--131

Findings, [57](#ch3.xhtml#page_57), [84](#ch4.xhtml#page_84),
[99](#ch5.xhtml#page_99), [207](#ch9.xhtml#page_207)--208

Fixed mindset, [79](#ch4.xhtml#page_79)--80

Flow, [72](#ch3.xhtml#page_72)

Focus, measure and, [66](#ch3.xhtml#page_66)--67

in goals, [22](#ch2.xhtml#page_22)

Formal leaders, [108](#ch5.xhtml#page_108), [121](#ch5.xhtml#page_121).
*See also* Opinion leaders

permission and, [134](#ch6.xhtml#page_134)

[]{#index.xhtml#page_217 type="pagebreak"}Frame, for behavior,
[61](#ch3.xhtml#page_61), [63](#ch3.xhtml#page_63)--69,
[73](#ch3.xhtml#page_73)--74

choice and, [55](#ch3.xhtml#page_55)--60

feeling and, [70](#ch3.xhtml#page_70)--72,
[154](#ch7.xhtml#page_154)--155

moral, [53](#ch3.xhtml#page_53)--54, [62](#ch3.xhtml#page_62),
[153](#ch7.xhtml#page_153)

Frequency, of measurement, [28](#ch2.xhtml#page_28)--29

Fundación Paraguaya, [14](#ch1.xhtml#page_14),
[24](#ch2.xhtml#page_24)--25

Fundamental attribution error, [54](#ch3.xhtml#page_54)

Gains, change and, [63](#ch3.xhtml#page_63)--64

Gallery Furniture, [13](#ch1.xhtml#page_13), [88](#ch4.xhtml#page_88)

Games, at The Other Side Academy, [120](#ch5.xhtml#page_120)--121,
[195](#ch8.xhtml#page_195)--196

Gamification, [72](#ch3.xhtml#page_72)--73, [202](#ch9.xhtml#page_202)

Genentech, [13](#ch1.xhtml#page_13)

Ghana, [91](#ch4.xhtml#page_91)

"Give it time" theory, [103](#ch5.xhtml#page_103)--104

Goals, [15](#ch1.xhtml#page_15)

challenges and, [72](#ch3.xhtml#page_72)--73,
[209](#notes.xhtml#page_209)

clarity of, [23](#ch2.xhtml#page_23)--25, [209](#notes.xhtml#page_209)

focus and measure in, [22](#ch2.xhtml#page_22)

Gold Fields case study, [114](#ch5.xhtml#page_114)

Graham, Ginger, [59](#ch3.xhtml#page_59)--60

Grameen Bank, [126](#ch6.xhtml#page_126)--131

consequences and, [156](#ch7.xhtml#page_156)--157

Grams, Laura, [13](#ch1.xhtml#page_13), [35](#ch2.xhtml#page_35)

Grassroots entrepreneurship, [126](#ch6.xhtml#page_126)--131

Gratification, delayed, [81](#ch4.xhtml#page_81)--82

Grenny, Joseph, [193](#ch8.xhtml#page_193), [208](#ch9.xhtml#page_208)

Growth mindset, [79](#ch4.xhtml#page_79)--80

Guidant, [59](#ch3.xhtml#page_59)--60

Guilt, [18](#ch2.xhtml#page_18), [47](#part2.xhtml#page_47),
[53](#ch3.xhtml#page_53), [55](#ch3.xhtml#page_55)--56

Guinea worm disease, [49](#ch3.xhtml#page_49)--50,
[157](#ch7.xhtml#page_157)

data and, [180](#ch8.xhtml#page_180)--182

Hopkins and, [20](#ch2.xhtml#page_20)--22, [35](#ch2.xhtml#page_35)--39

opinion leaders and, [111](#ch5.xhtml#page_111)

tools for, [191](#ch8.xhtml#page_191)--192

Habits, [92](#ch4.xhtml#page_92), [197](#ch8.xhtml#page_197)--198

personal ability and, [82](#ch4.xhtml#page_82)--83

results and, [7](#ch1.xhtml#page_7)

Haidt, Jonathan, [52](#ch3.xhtml#page_52)

Hancock, Dain, [12](#ch1.xhtml#page_12), [107](#ch5.xhtml#page_107)

Hate, transformed into love, [50](#ch3.xhtml#page_50)--52

HCA Healthcare, [13](#ch1.xhtml#page_13)--14,
[34](#ch2.xhtml#page_34)--35

Healthcare field, [13](#ch1.xhtml#page_13)--14,
[20](#ch2.xhtml#page_20)--22, [60](#ch3.xhtml#page_60)--62

code of silence in, [115](#ch5.xhtml#page_115),
[117](#ch5.xhtml#page_117)--118

Covid-19 pandemic and, [34](#ch2.xhtml#page_34)--35

deliberate practice in, [87](#ch4.xhtml#page_87)

IHI, [23](#ch2.xhtml#page_23)--24, [110](#ch5.xhtml#page_110)

process in, [212](#notes.xhtml#page_212)

six sources of influence and, [206](#ch9.xhtml#page_206)--207

Spectrum Healthcare, [142](#ch6.xhtml#page_142)--143

Heath, Ralph, [58](#ch3.xhtml#page_58)--59

Help, [59](#ch3.xhtml#page_59)--60, [148](#ch6.xhtml#page_148)

empowerment and, [132](#ch6.xhtml#page_132)--133

from opinion leaders, [142](#ch6.xhtml#page_142)--143

from peers, [138](#ch6.xhtml#page_138)

social ability and, [139](#ch6.xhtml#page_139)--143

from team, [131](#ch6.xhtml#page_131)

as tool, [141](#ch6.xhtml#page_141)

Hertz, [105](#ch5.xhtml#page_105)--106

Higgins, Stephen, [158](#ch7.xhtml#page_158)

Hitler, Adolf, [96](#ch5.xhtml#page_96), [173](#ch8.xhtml#page_173)--174

Home

leadership at, [9](#ch1.xhtml#page_9)--10

work from, [185](#ch8.xhtml#page_185)--186

Honesty, [133](#ch6.xhtml#page_133)

morale and, [134](#ch6.xhtml#page_134)--136

Hope, [199](#ch9.xhtml#page_199), [207](#ch9.xhtml#page_207)--208

Hope Squads, [138](#ch6.xhtml#page_138)--139

Hopkins, Donald

data and, [180](#ch8.xhtml#page_180)--182

Guinea worm disease and, [20](#ch2.xhtml#page_20)--22,
[35](#ch2.xhtml#page_35)--39

opinion leaders and, [111](#ch5.xhtml#page_111)

*How to 10X Your Influence*, [9](#ch1.xhtml#page_9)

Hudnall, Greg, [138](#ch6.xhtml#page_138)--139

IHI. *See* Institute for Healthcare Improvement

Imai, Masaaki, *Kaizen*, [162](#ch7.xhtml#page_162)--163

[]{#index.xhtml#page_218 type="pagebreak"}Impact, of stories,
[69](#ch3.xhtml#page_69)--70

Improvement, [73](#ch3.xhtml#page_73)

incentives for, [161](#ch7.xhtml#page_161)--163

Inaction, social ability and, [140](#ch6.xhtml#page_140)--141

Incarceration, [31](#ch2.xhtml#page_31)--32

Incentives, [151](#ch7.xhtml#page_151), [169](#ch7.xhtml#page_169)

for improvement, [161](#ch7.xhtml#page_161)--163

moral frame compared to, [152](#ch7.xhtml#page_152)--156

simple, [157](#ch7.xhtml#page_157)--161

work-life balance and, [164](#ch7.xhtml#page_164)

India, [126](#ch6.xhtml#page_126)--128

Lutsaan, [111](#ch5.xhtml#page_111), [116](#ch5.xhtml#page_116)--117

Individual limits, [125](#ch6.xhtml#page_125)

Industries

corporate, [112](#ch5.xhtml#page_112), [184](#ch8.xhtml#page_184)

customer service, [6](#ch1.xhtml#page_6),
[105](#ch5.xhtml#page_105)--106

energy, [152](#ch7.xhtml#page_152)--153

farming, [108](#ch5.xhtml#page_108)--109

healthcare, [13](#ch1.xhtml#page_13)--14, [20](#ch2.xhtml#page_20)--22,
[60](#ch3.xhtml#page_60)--62

military, [27](#ch2.xhtml#page_27)--28

project management, [116](#ch5.xhtml#page_116)

restaurant, [172](#ch8.xhtml#page_172)--173

retail, [193](#ch8.xhtml#page_193)--194

shipping, [178](#ch8.xhtml#page_178)

telecommunication, [112](#ch5.xhtml#page_112)--113,
[147](#ch6.xhtml#page_147)

Inevitability, routine and, [194](#ch8.xhtml#page_194)--195

Influencers, [6](#ch1.xhtml#page_6)--7. *See also* Act Like an
Influencer

Information, [179](#ch8.xhtml#page_179)--180. *See also* Data stream

attention and, [181](#ch8.xhtml#page_181)--182

Innovators, [109](#ch5.xhtml#page_109)

opinion leaders and, [110](#ch5.xhtml#page_110)

Inslee, Jay, [155](#ch7.xhtml#page_155)--156

Institute for Healthcare Improvement (IHI),
[23](#ch2.xhtml#page_23)--24, [110](#ch5.xhtml#page_110)

Integrity, [52](#ch3.xhtml#page_52), [137](#ch6.xhtml#page_137)

ego and, [106](#ch5.xhtml#page_106)--107

Intentional influence, [6](#ch1.xhtml#page_6)--9

Interactions, positive, [67](#ch3.xhtml#page_67)

Intermountain Healthcare, [13](#ch1.xhtml#page_13)

Interpersonal skills, [92](#ch4.xhtml#page_92)

Interventions, [140](#ch6.xhtml#page_140)--141

addiction and, [56](#ch3.xhtml#page_56)--57

Interview, motivational, [56](#ch3.xhtml#page_56)--59

Intrapersonal skills, [92](#ch4.xhtml#page_92)

Intrinsic pleasure, [154](#ch7.xhtml#page_154)

Invisibility, [177](#ch8.xhtml#page_177)--179

in environments, [173](#ch8.xhtml#page_173)--174,
[176](#ch8.xhtml#page_176)

Iowa, farming industry in, [108](#ch5.xhtml#page_108)--109

Isolation, [142](#ch6.xhtml#page_142)

Japhet, Garth, [139](#ch6.xhtml#page_139)--141

Johns Hopkins Hospital, [157](#ch7.xhtml#page_157)

Judgment, empathy compared to, [57](#ch3.xhtml#page_57)--58

*Kaizen* (Imai), [162](#ch7.xhtml#page_162)--163

Kelling, George, [174](#ch8.xhtml#page_174)--175

Keys, to influence, [20](#ch2.xhtml#page_20)--22,
[29](#ch2.xhtml#page_29)--34, [36](#ch2.xhtml#page_36)--37,
[40](#ch2.xhtml#page_40), [199](#ch9.xhtml#page_199)--200

KIPP schools, [14](#ch1.xhtml#page_14), [144](#ch6.xhtml#page_144)

case study of, [36](#ch2.xhtml#page_36)

Kuala Lumpur, [106](#ch5.xhtml#page_106)--107

Laws, enforcement of, [166](#ch7.xhtml#page_166)--168

Learning, [51](#ch3.xhtml#page_51)--52, [90](#ch4.xhtml#page_90),
[207](#ch9.xhtml#page_207)--208

how to learn, [79](#ch4.xhtml#page_79)

negative reinforcement and, [96](#ch5.xhtml#page_96)--99

of skills, [13](#ch1.xhtml#page_13)--14, [82](#ch4.xhtml#page_82),
[92](#ch4.xhtml#page_92)

Lepper, Mark, [153](#ch7.xhtml#page_153)

Levin, David, [144](#ch6.xhtml#page_144)

Lewin, Kurt, [176](#ch8.xhtml#page_176)

Limits, individual, [125](#ch6.xhtml#page_125)

Literature, on influence, [10](#ch1.xhtml#page_10)--11

Lockheed Martin Aeronautics, [12](#ch1.xhtml#page_12),
[58](#ch3.xhtml#page_58)--59, [107](#ch5.xhtml#page_107)

Loss, change and, [63](#ch3.xhtml#page_63)--64

Love, hate transformed into, [50](#ch3.xhtml#page_50)--52

Lutsaan, India

norms in, [116](#ch5.xhtml#page_116)--117

opinion leaders in, [111](#ch5.xhtml#page_111)

[]{#index.xhtml#page_219 type="pagebreak"}Manhattan, New York,
[3](#ch1.xhtml#page_3)--5

Matsushita, [162](#ch7.xhtml#page_162)--163

Mead, Margaret, [208](#ch9.xhtml#page_208)

Meaning

of incentives, [159](#ch7.xhtml#page_159)

in variables, [27](#ch2.xhtml#page_27)--28

Measure, focus and, [66](#ch3.xhtml#page_66)--67

behavior and, [22](#ch2.xhtml#page_22)

Measurement

accountability and, [26](#ch2.xhtml#page_26)--29

effort and, [29](#ch2.xhtml#page_29)

failure of, [26](#ch2.xhtml#page_26)

Medical science

errors, [196](#ch8.xhtml#page_196)

social science compared to, [21](#ch2.xhtml#page_21)--22

Mencken, H. L., [43](#part2.xhtml#page_43)

Menlo Innovations, [7](#ch1.xhtml#page_7)--8, [142](#ch6.xhtml#page_142)

Mentors, opinion leaders as, [112](#ch5.xhtml#page_112)

Meyer, Danny, [3](#ch1.xhtml#page_3)--5, [50](#ch3.xhtml#page_50),
[70](#ch3.xhtml#page_70)--71, [112](#ch5.xhtml#page_112)

incentives and, [156](#ch7.xhtml#page_156)

measurement and, [29](#ch2.xhtml#page_29)

Microcredit, [130](#ch6.xhtml#page_130)--131

Milgram, Stanley, [96](#ch5.xhtml#page_96)--99

Military field, [27](#ch2.xhtml#page_27)--28

Miller, William, [55](#ch3.xhtml#page_55)--57

Mindsets, [79](#ch4.xhtml#page_79)--80

Mischel, Walter, [80](#ch4.xhtml#page_80)--82

Mobilization, [6](#ch1.xhtml#page_6), [165](#ch7.xhtml#page_165)

Mockus, Antanas, [12](#ch1.xhtml#page_12), [179](#ch8.xhtml#page_179)

Models, [148](#ch6.xhtml#page_148)

from opinion leaders, [137](#ch6.xhtml#page_137)--138

social ability and, [136](#ch6.xhtml#page_136)--139

Money, sacrifice of, [105](#ch5.xhtml#page_105)--106

MoneyGram, [14](#ch1.xhtml#page_14)

Moral duty, empathy and, [62](#ch3.xhtml#page_62)--63

Moral frame, [53](#ch3.xhtml#page_53)--54, [62](#ch3.xhtml#page_62)

incentives compared to, [152](#ch7.xhtml#page_152)--156

Morale, honesty and, [134](#ch6.xhtml#page_134)--136

Motivation

ability and, [43](#part2.xhtml#page_43)--44

incentives and, [158](#ch7.xhtml#page_158)--159

personal, [37](#ch2.xhtml#page_37)--38, [44](#part2.xhtml#page_44),
[49](#ch3.xhtml#page_49)--51, [59](#ch3.xhtml#page_59)--60,
[71](#ch3.xhtml#page_71), [74](#ch3.xhtml#page_74)

social, [38](#ch2.xhtml#page_38)--39, [102](#ch5.xhtml#page_102),
[112](#ch5.xhtml#page_112), [121](#ch5.xhtml#page_121)--122

structural, [39](#ch2.xhtml#page_39), [169](#ch7.xhtml#page_169)

Motivational interview, [56](#ch3.xhtml#page_56)--59

MTN Group, [13](#ch1.xhtml#page_13), [102](#ch5.xhtml#page_102)--105

National Restaurant Association (NRA), [172](#ch8.xhtml#page_172)--173

Negative reinforcement, learning and, [96](#ch5.xhtml#page_96)--99

Network quotient (NQ), [147](#ch6.xhtml#page_147)

New Haven, Connecticut, [96](#ch5.xhtml#page_96)

New York, [174](#ch8.xhtml#page_174)--175

Manhattan, [3](#ch1.xhtml#page_3)--5

Newmont Mining, [14](#ch1.xhtml#page_14), [91](#ch4.xhtml#page_91)

Nigeria, Guinea worm disease in, [181](#ch8.xhtml#page_181)

Norms, [114](#ch5.xhtml#page_114)--115, [122](#ch5.xhtml#page_122)

candor and, [120](#ch5.xhtml#page_120)

in Lutsaan, [116](#ch5.xhtml#page_116)--117

organizational, [19](#ch2.xhtml#page_19)

permission and, [135](#ch6.xhtml#page_135)--136

200 percent accountability as, [118](#ch5.xhtml#page_118)--121

North Carolina, police in, [165](#ch7.xhtml#page_165)--167,
[205](#ch9.xhtml#page_205)

NQ. *See* Network quotient

NRA. *See* National Restaurant Association

Objectives, failure to define, [23](#ch2.xhtml#page_23)--25,
[86](#ch4.xhtml#page_86), [209](#notes.xhtml#page_209)

100,000 Lives Campaign, [23](#ch2.xhtml#page_23)--24

Open communication, [116](#ch5.xhtml#page_116)--118

Opinion leaders, [108](#ch5.xhtml#page_108)--109,
[114](#ch5.xhtml#page_114), [121](#ch5.xhtml#page_121),
[135](#ch6.xhtml#page_135)

help from, [142](#ch6.xhtml#page_142)--143

innovators and, [110](#ch5.xhtml#page_110)

in Lutsaan, [111](#ch5.xhtml#page_111)

as mentors, [112](#ch5.xhtml#page_112)

models from, [137](#ch6.xhtml#page_137)--138

trust and, [113](#ch5.xhtml#page_113)

[]{#index.xhtml#page_220 type="pagebreak"}Organizational culture,
[7](#ch1.xhtml#page_7)--8, [28](#ch2.xhtml#page_28)--29

Organizational norms, [19](#ch2.xhtml#page_19)

The Other Side Academy, [30](#ch2.xhtml#page_30),
[50](#ch3.xhtml#page_50)--52, [136](#ch6.xhtml#page_136)--137,
[209](#notes.xhtml#page_209)

deliberate practice and, [87](#ch4.xhtml#page_87)--88

direct experiences and, [63](#ch3.xhtml#page_63)--64

Games of, [120](#ch5.xhtml#page_120)--121,
[195](#ch8.xhtml#page_195)--196

motivational interview and, [57](#ch3.xhtml#page_57)--58

norms at, [118](#ch5.xhtml#page_118)--121

propinquity in, [186](#ch8.xhtml#page_186)--188

simple incentives and, [159](#ch7.xhtml#page_159)--160

vital behaviors and, [31](#ch2.xhtml#page_31)--33

Outcomes, behavior and, [197](#ch8.xhtml#page_197)--198

Overdetermine success, [37](#ch2.xhtml#page_37),
[201](#ch9.xhtml#page_201), [204](#ch9.xhtml#page_204)

Overjustification effect, [154](#ch7.xhtml#page_154)

Overthinking influence, [202](#ch9.xhtml#page_202)--203

Pakistan

Guinea worm disease in, [181](#ch8.xhtml#page_181)

police of, [14](#ch1.xhtml#page_14)

Pandemic. *See* Covid-19 pandemic

Park City, Utah, [64](#ch3.xhtml#page_64)--65

Peers

accountability and, [33](#ch2.xhtml#page_33), [87](#ch4.xhtml#page_87),
[114](#ch5.xhtml#page_114)--117, [122](#ch5.xhtml#page_122)

coaching from, [144](#ch6.xhtml#page_144)

feedback from, [88](#ch4.xhtml#page_88)

help from, [138](#ch6.xhtml#page_138)

Perfection, [83](#ch4.xhtml#page_83)

Performance, [80](#ch4.xhtml#page_80)

Permission, [133](#ch6.xhtml#page_133), [148](#ch6.xhtml#page_148)

formal leaders and, [134](#ch6.xhtml#page_134)

norms and, [135](#ch6.xhtml#page_135)--136

Personal ability, [38](#ch2.xhtml#page_38),
[77](#ch4.xhtml#page_77)--79, [92](#ch4.xhtml#page_92)

habits and, [82](#ch4.xhtml#page_82)--83

Personal drivers, of behavior, [44](#part2.xhtml#page_44)--46

Personal motivation, [37](#ch2.xhtml#page_37)--38,
[44](#part2.xhtml#page_44), [49](#ch3.xhtml#page_49)--51,
[59](#ch3.xhtml#page_59)--60, [71](#ch3.xhtml#page_71),
[74](#ch3.xhtml#page_74)

Personality traits, [81](#ch4.xhtml#page_81)

Persuasion, [6](#ch1.xhtml#page_6)

social motivation and, [95](#ch5.xhtml#page_95)

Phobia, [65](#ch3.xhtml#page_65)--67

Physical environments, [190](#ch8.xhtml#page_190)

invisibility in, [173](#ch8.xhtml#page_173)--174

propinquity and, [184](#ch8.xhtml#page_184)--185

structural ability and, [171](#ch8.xhtml#page_171)--172

Pizza Hut, [14](#ch1.xhtml#page_14)

Pleasure

intrinsic, [154](#ch7.xhtml#page_154)

shame and, [78](#ch4.xhtml#page_78)--79

from vital behaviors, [49](#ch3.xhtml#page_49)--50,
[52](#ch3.xhtml#page_52)

Police, [14](#ch1.xhtml#page_14), [205](#ch9.xhtml#page_205)

discipline and, [165](#ch7.xhtml#page_165)--167

Positive deviance, [185](#ch8.xhtml#page_185)--186

vital behaviors and, [34](#ch2.xhtml#page_34)--36

Positive interactions, [67](#ch3.xhtml#page_67)

Positive social influence, [99](#ch5.xhtml#page_99)

Poverty, [24](#ch2.xhtml#page_24)--25

entrepreneurship and, [129](#ch6.xhtml#page_129)--131

propinquity and, [189](#ch8.xhtml#page_189)--190

Power, social, [95](#ch5.xhtml#page_95)

Practice

deliberate, [83](#ch4.xhtml#page_83)--92

skill and, [38](#ch2.xhtml#page_38), [84](#ch4.xhtml#page_84)--86

of vital behaviors, [63](#ch3.xhtml#page_63)--64,
[90](#ch4.xhtml#page_90)--91

Praise, of vital behaviors, [99](#ch5.xhtml#page_99),
[162](#ch7.xhtml#page_162)

"Predictable spontaneity," [185](#ch8.xhtml#page_185)

PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC), [14](#ch1.xhtml#page_14)

Principles, efficiency, [191](#ch8.xhtml#page_191)

Priorities, [105](#ch5.xhtml#page_105), [180](#ch8.xhtml#page_180)

data and, [181](#ch8.xhtml#page_181)--182

sacrifice of, [107](#ch5.xhtml#page_107)

Process, [172](#ch8.xhtml#page_172)--173

in healthcare field, [212](#notes.xhtml#page_212)

rituals and, [196](#ch8.xhtml#page_196)--197

Productivity, [102](#ch5.xhtml#page_102)--103

Project management field, code of silence in, [116](#ch5.xhtml#page_116)

Propinquity, [176](#ch8.xhtml#page_176), [198](#ch8.xhtml#page_198)

difficulty and ease and, [192](#ch8.xhtml#page_192)--193

enmity and, [187](#ch8.xhtml#page_187)--188

physical and virtual environment and, [184](#ch8.xhtml#page_184)--186

[]{#index.xhtml#page_221 type="pagebreak"}poverty and,
[189](#ch8.xhtml#page_189)--190

in retail industry, [193](#ch8.xhtml#page_193)--194

Psychological experiments, [80](#ch4.xhtml#page_80)--82,
[99](#ch5.xhtml#page_99)

Public discourse, [117](#ch5.xhtml#page_117)--118,
[122](#ch5.xhtml#page_122)

Punishment, in experiments, [164](#ch7.xhtml#page_164)--165

PwC. *See* PricewaterhouseCoopers

Questions, [56](#ch3.xhtml#page_56)--58, [200](#ch9.xhtml#page_200)

of "why," [18](#ch2.xhtml#page_18)--19

Quick fix, [42](#part2.xhtml#page_42)

Radio Tanzania, [68](#ch3.xhtml#page_68)--70

Recognition, for accomplishments, [51](#ch3.xhtml#page_51),
[64](#ch3.xhtml#page_64), [118](#ch5.xhtml#page_118),
[159](#ch7.xhtml#page_159), [163](#ch7.xhtml#page_163)

Redwoods Insurance, YMCA and, [29](#ch2.xhtml#page_29)--30

Reframe, of behavior, [55](#ch3.xhtml#page_55),
[59](#ch3.xhtml#page_59)--60, [70](#ch3.xhtml#page_70)--74

Reinforcement

incentives as, [153](#ch7.xhtml#page_153)--154

negative, [96](#ch5.xhtml#page_96)--99

Repeatability

of influence, [6](#ch1.xhtml#page_6), [11](#ch1.xhtml#page_11)

of success, [13](#ch1.xhtml#page_13), [209](#notes.xhtml#page_209)

Research, [199](#ch9.xhtml#page_199)

on skills, [84](#ch4.xhtml#page_84)

Resentment, of punishment, [165](#ch7.xhtml#page_165)

Resistance, willingness and, [55](#ch3.xhtml#page_55)--56

Respect, [38](#ch2.xhtml#page_38)--39, [107](#ch5.xhtml#page_107),
[110](#ch5.xhtml#page_110)--112, [114](#ch5.xhtml#page_114),
[121](#ch5.xhtml#page_121)

Restaurant industry, influence theory in,
[172](#ch8.xhtml#page_172)--173

Results, [18](#ch2.xhtml#page_18)--20, [25](#ch2.xhtml#page_25),
[199](#ch9.xhtml#page_199)

behavior compared to, [161](#ch7.xhtml#page_161)--163

habits and, [7](#ch1.xhtml#page_7)

Retail industry, propinquity in, [193](#ch8.xhtml#page_193)--194

Rewards, [161](#ch7.xhtml#page_161). *See also* Incentives

control of, [73](#ch3.xhtml#page_73)

of effort, [162](#ch7.xhtml#page_162)--163

small, [151](#ch7.xhtml#page_151)--152, [159](#ch7.xhtml#page_159)--160

token, [39](#ch2.xhtml#page_39)

Risk

candor and, [100](#ch5.xhtml#page_100)--101, [135](#ch6.xhtml#page_135)

uncertainty and, [102](#ch5.xhtml#page_102)--103

to vital behaviors, [78](#ch4.xhtml#page_78)

Rituals

in family, [188](#ch8.xhtml#page_188)--189

feedback and, [195](#ch8.xhtml#page_195)--196

process and, [196](#ch8.xhtml#page_196)--197

virtual, [186](#ch8.xhtml#page_186)

Rogers, Everett, [70](#ch3.xhtml#page_70), [113](#ch5.xhtml#page_113)

influence theory and, [108](#ch5.xhtml#page_108)--110

Rojanapithayakorn, Wiwat, [11](#ch1.xhtml#page_11),
[157](#ch7.xhtml#page_157), [204](#ch9.xhtml#page_204)--205

coaching by, [144](#ch6.xhtml#page_144)--147

Routine, inevitability and, [194](#ch8.xhtml#page_194)--195

Sacrifice, [121](#ch5.xhtml#page_121)

of ego, [106](#ch5.xhtml#page_106)--107

of money, [105](#ch5.xhtml#page_105)--106

of priorities, [107](#ch5.xhtml#page_107)

of time, [105](#ch5.xhtml#page_105)

values and, [103](#ch5.xhtml#page_103)--104

Salt Lake City, Utah, [30](#ch2.xhtml#page_30),
[209](#notes.xhtml#page_209)

San Francisco, California, [209](#notes.xhtml#page_209)

Schachter, Stanley, [176](#ch8.xhtml#page_176)

Schulman, Dan, [62](#ch3.xhtml#page_62)--63

Schultz, Howard, [89](#ch4.xhtml#page_89)

"Second Chance" strategy, [165](#ch7.xhtml#page_165)--166,
[205](#ch9.xhtml#page_205)

Sedaris, David, [10](#ch1.xhtml#page_10)

Self-discipline, [78](#ch4.xhtml#page_78)--83

Self-employment, capital and, [129](#ch6.xhtml#page_129)--130

Shakespeare, William, [143](#ch6.xhtml#page_143)

Shakira, [179](#ch8.xhtml#page_179)

Shame, pleasure and, [78](#ch4.xhtml#page_78)--79

Sheridan, Rich, [7](#ch1.xhtml#page_7)--8, [142](#ch6.xhtml#page_142)

Shipping industry, [178](#ch8.xhtml#page_178)

Siddiqui, Muhammad, [102](#ch5.xhtml#page_102)--105

Silbert, Mimi, [209](#notes.xhtml#page_209)

[]{#index.xhtml#page_222 type="pagebreak"}Simple incentives,
[157](#ch7.xhtml#page_157)--161

Simple technology, [172](#ch8.xhtml#page_172)--173

Simplification, [198](#ch8.xhtml#page_198)

Sincerity, [104](#ch5.xhtml#page_104)

Singhal, Arvind, [70](#ch3.xhtml#page_70), [111](#ch5.xhtml#page_111),
[117](#ch5.xhtml#page_117)

Single-source strategies, [42](#part2.xhtml#page_42)--43

Six sources of influence, [19](#ch2.xhtml#page_19)--20,
[36](#ch2.xhtml#page_36)--39, [172](#ch8.xhtml#page_172),
[200](#ch9.xhtml#page_200)--202, [204](#ch9.xhtml#page_204),
[208](#ch9.xhtml#page_208)

diagnosis in, [45](#part2.xhtml#page_45)--47

discipline and, [165](#ch7.xhtml#page_165)--167

healthcare field and, [206](#ch9.xhtml#page_206)--207

incentives and, [151](#ch7.xhtml#page_151)--153

motivation and ability in, [43](#part2.xhtml#page_43)--44,
[77](#ch4.xhtml#page_77)--79, [92](#ch4.xhtml#page_92),
[125](#ch6.xhtml#page_125), [148](#ch6.xhtml#page_148),
[198](#ch8.xhtml#page_198)

single-source strategies and, [42](#part2.xhtml#page_42)--43

Small rewards, [151](#ch7.xhtml#page_151)--152,
[159](#ch7.xhtml#page_159)--160

Social ability, [39](#ch2.xhtml#page_39), [125](#ch6.xhtml#page_125),
[148](#ch6.xhtml#page_148)

candor and, [132](#ch6.xhtml#page_132)

coaching and, [143](#ch6.xhtml#page_143)--147

entrepreneurship and, [126](#ch6.xhtml#page_126)--131

help and, [139](#ch6.xhtml#page_139)--143

inaction and, [140](#ch6.xhtml#page_140)--141

models and, [136](#ch6.xhtml#page_136)--139

permission and, [133](#ch6.xhtml#page_133)--136

Social capital, [125](#ch6.xhtml#page_125), [132](#ch6.xhtml#page_132)

work-from-home shift and, [185](#ch8.xhtml#page_185)--186

Social drivers, of behavior, [44](#part2.xhtml#page_44)--46

Social influence, [95](#ch5.xhtml#page_95)--99

connection and, [122](#ch5.xhtml#page_122)

data stream and, [182](#ch8.xhtml#page_182)

embrace of, [116](#ch5.xhtml#page_116)--117

Social motivation, [38](#ch2.xhtml#page_38)--39,
[102](#ch5.xhtml#page_102), [112](#ch5.xhtml#page_112),
[121](#ch5.xhtml#page_121)--122

persuasion and, [95](#ch5.xhtml#page_95)

vicarious experience and, [101](#ch5.xhtml#page_101)

Social science

AIDS and, [145](#ch6.xhtml#page_145)

medical science compared to, [21](#ch2.xhtml#page_21)--22

Soul City, [139](#ch6.xhtml#page_139)--141

South Africa, violence against women in, [139](#ch6.xhtml#page_139)--141

Soviet Union, energy sector in, [152](#ch7.xhtml#page_152)--153

Spectrum Healthcare, [142](#ch6.xhtml#page_142)--143

Standards, enforcement of, [168](#ch7.xhtml#page_168)--169

Starbucks, [89](#ch4.xhtml#page_89)

State Farm, [14](#ch1.xhtml#page_14)

Steele, Fred, [173](#ch8.xhtml#page_173)--174

Stories, [68](#ch3.xhtml#page_68)

impact of, [69](#ch3.xhtml#page_69)--70

as vicarious experience, [69](#ch3.xhtml#page_69)--72

Strategy, of influence, [199](#ch9.xhtml#page_199)

diagnosis and, [200](#ch9.xhtml#page_200)--201

Structural ability, [39](#ch2.xhtml#page_39),
[179](#ch8.xhtml#page_179)--182, [198](#ch8.xhtml#page_198)

physical and virtual environments and, [171](#ch8.xhtml#page_171)--172

Structural drivers, of behavior, [44](#part2.xhtml#page_44)

Structural motivation, [39](#ch2.xhtml#page_39),
[169](#ch7.xhtml#page_169)

incentives as, [151](#ch7.xhtml#page_151)--152

Study

of AIDS transmission, [145](#ch6.xhtml#page_145)

at Johns Hopkins Hospital, [157](#ch7.xhtml#page_157)

by Milgram, [96](#ch5.xhtml#page_96)--99

at Yale, [96](#ch5.xhtml#page_96)

Success

overdetermining, [37](#ch2.xhtml#page_37), [201](#ch9.xhtml#page_201),
[204](#ch9.xhtml#page_204)

repeatability of, [13](#ch1.xhtml#page_13), [209](#notes.xhtml#page_209)

Support

of candor, [100](#ch5.xhtml#page_100)--101

social, [107](#ch5.xhtml#page_107)--108, [153](#ch7.xhtml#page_153)--154

Swai, Martha, [12](#ch1.xhtml#page_12), [68](#ch3.xhtml#page_68)--70,
[204](#ch9.xhtml#page_204)--205

Systems, social, [109](#ch5.xhtml#page_109)--110,
[119](#ch5.xhtml#page_119)--120

Tactics, [55](#ch3.xhtml#page_55), [59](#ch3.xhtml#page_59),
[65](#ch3.xhtml#page_65)--67, [74](#ch3.xhtml#page_74)

direct experience as, [60](#ch3.xhtml#page_60)--64

gamification as, [72](#ch3.xhtml#page_72)--73

questions as, [56](#ch3.xhtml#page_56)--58

stories as, [68](#ch3.xhtml#page_68)--72

Tanzania, [12](#ch1.xhtml#page_12)

AIDS in, [68](#ch3.xhtml#page_68)--70

Team, help from, [131](#ch6.xhtml#page_131)

[]{#index.xhtml#page_223 type="pagebreak"}Technology, simple,
[172](#ch8.xhtml#page_172)--173

Teffera, Negussie, [167](#ch7.xhtml#page_167)--168

Telecommunication industry, [112](#ch5.xhtml#page_112)--113,
[147](#ch6.xhtml#page_147)

Thailand, [144](#ch6.xhtml#page_144)--147

Bangkok, [11](#ch1.xhtml#page_11)

Theory, of influence, [9](#ch1.xhtml#page_9),
[17](#ch2.xhtml#page_17)--18, [36](#ch2.xhtml#page_36)--37,
[44](#part2.xhtml#page_44)--46

failure and, [10](#ch1.xhtml#page_10)

in restaurant industry, [172](#ch8.xhtml#page_172)--173

Rogers and, [108](#ch5.xhtml#page_108)--110

Things, [174](#ch8.xhtml#page_174)--177

Thrifting, [204](#ch9.xhtml#page_204)--205

diagnosis and, [206](#ch9.xhtml#page_206)--207

Time, sacrifice of, [105](#ch5.xhtml#page_105)

*Tinka, Tinka Sukh* ("Happiness Lies in Small Things"),
[111](#ch5.xhtml#page_111), [116](#ch5.xhtml#page_116)--117

Token rewards, [39](#ch2.xhtml#page_39)

Tools, [201](#ch9.xhtml#page_201)--202

Guinea worm disease and, [191](#ch8.xhtml#page_191)--192

help as, [141](#ch6.xhtml#page_141)

Training, [42](#part2.xhtml#page_42), [135](#ch6.xhtml#page_135),
[159](#ch7.xhtml#page_159), [172](#ch8.xhtml#page_172)

Traits, personality, [81](#ch4.xhtml#page_81)

Transformation

of culture, [100](#ch5.xhtml#page_100)--101, [139](#ch6.xhtml#page_139)

from hate to love, [50](#ch3.xhtml#page_50)--52

Trust

apology and, [103](#ch5.xhtml#page_103)--107

of community, [136](#ch6.xhtml#page_136)--137

opinion leaders and, [113](#ch5.xhtml#page_113)

Truth, model of, [136](#ch6.xhtml#page_136)--137

*Twende na Wakati* ("Let's Go with the Times"),
[68](#ch3.xhtml#page_68)--70

200 percent accountability, [33](#ch2.xhtml#page_33)

as norm, [118](#ch5.xhtml#page_118)--121

Uncertainty, risk and, [102](#ch5.xhtml#page_102)--103

Unconscious behavior, [177](#ch8.xhtml#page_177)

habits as, [197](#ch8.xhtml#page_197)--198

Underhill, Paco, [193](#ch8.xhtml#page_193)--194

Understanding, challenges to, [77](#ch4.xhtml#page_77)--78

Underthinking influence

everyday challenges and, [203](#ch9.xhtml#page_203)--204

thrifting and, [204](#ch9.xhtml#page_204)--207

Unilever, [137](#ch6.xhtml#page_137)

Unintended consequences, [164](#ch7.xhtml#page_164)--165

of incentives, [152](#ch7.xhtml#page_152)--154

Union Square Hospitality Group (USHG), [4](#ch1.xhtml#page_4)--5,
[70](#ch3.xhtml#page_70)--71

United States (US)

Army of, [27](#ch2.xhtml#page_27)--28

California, [187](#ch8.xhtml#page_187), [209](#notes.xhtml#page_209)

Connecticut, [96](#ch5.xhtml#page_96)

Iowa, [108](#ch5.xhtml#page_108)--109

New York, [3](#ch1.xhtml#page_3)--5, [174](#ch8.xhtml#page_174)--175

North Carolina, [165](#ch7.xhtml#page_165)--167,
[205](#ch9.xhtml#page_205)

Utah, [30](#ch2.xhtml#page_30), [64](#ch3.xhtml#page_64)--65,
[209](#notes.xhtml#page_209)

Washington, [155](#ch7.xhtml#page_155)--156

University of Minnesota Medical Center, [206](#ch9.xhtml#page_206)

USHG. *See* Union Square Hospitality Group

Utah

Park City, [64](#ch3.xhtml#page_64)--65

Salt Lake City, [30](#ch2.xhtml#page_30), [209](#notes.xhtml#page_209)

Values, [169](#ch7.xhtml#page_169)

sacrifice and, [103](#ch5.xhtml#page_103)--104

Variables, meaningful, [27](#ch2.xhtml#page_27)--28

Vicarious experience, [65](#ch3.xhtml#page_65)--67,
[117](#ch5.xhtml#page_117)

social motivation and, [101](#ch5.xhtml#page_101)

stories as, [69](#ch3.xhtml#page_69)--72

Violence

"broken windows theory" and, [174](#ch8.xhtml#page_174)--175

against women, [139](#ch6.xhtml#page_139)--141

Virtual environments

propinquity and, [185](#ch8.xhtml#page_185)--186

rituals in, [186](#ch8.xhtml#page_186)

structural ability and, [171](#ch8.xhtml#page_171)

[]{#index.xhtml#page_224 type="pagebreak"}Visual cues,
[174](#ch8.xhtml#page_174)--175, [177](#ch8.xhtml#page_177)--178

Vital behaviors, [7](#ch1.xhtml#page_7)--8,
[18](#ch2.xhtml#page_18)--20, [29](#ch2.xhtml#page_29)--30,
[55](#ch3.xhtml#page_55), [199](#ch9.xhtml#page_199)--200

accountability for, [120](#ch5.xhtml#page_120)--121

choice and, [59](#ch3.xhtml#page_59)--60

clarity about, [33](#ch2.xhtml#page_33)

data stream and, [183](#ch8.xhtml#page_183)

ego and, [106](#ch5.xhtml#page_106)

gamification of, [73](#ch3.xhtml#page_73)

incentives for, [151](#ch7.xhtml#page_151),
[160](#ch7.xhtml#page_160)--161

moral frame of, [153](#ch7.xhtml#page_153)

The Other Side Academy and, [31](#ch2.xhtml#page_31)--33

pleasure from, [49](#ch3.xhtml#page_49)--50, [52](#ch3.xhtml#page_52)

positive deviance and, [34](#ch2.xhtml#page_34)--36

practice of, [63](#ch3.xhtml#page_63)--64, [90](#ch4.xhtml#page_90)--91

praise of, [99](#ch5.xhtml#page_99), [162](#ch7.xhtml#page_162)

risk to, [78](#ch4.xhtml#page_78)

Vulnerability, propinquity and, [188](#ch8.xhtml#page_188)

Walk the talk, [100](#ch5.xhtml#page_100)--105

Wansik, Brian, [175](#ch8.xhtml#page_175)--177,
[192](#ch8.xhtml#page_192)

Warwick, Warren, [206](#ch9.xhtml#page_206)--207

Washington, [155](#ch7.xhtml#page_155)--156

Water shortage, in Bogotá, [179](#ch8.xhtml#page_179)

Weissmuller, Johnny, [84](#ch4.xhtml#page_84)

"Why" question, [18](#ch2.xhtml#page_18)--19

Will, skill and, [80](#ch4.xhtml#page_80)--83

Willingness, resistance and, [55](#ch3.xhtml#page_55)--56

Willow Creek Food Pantry, [14](#ch1.xhtml#page_14)

Work-from-home shift, social capital and,
[185](#ch8.xhtml#page_185)--186

Work-life balance, incentives and, [164](#ch7.xhtml#page_164)

Yale University, [96](#ch5.xhtml#page_96)

*Yeken Kignit* ("Looking Over One's Daily Life"),
[167](#ch7.xhtml#page_167)--168

YMCA, Redwoods Insurance and, [29](#ch2.xhtml#page_29)--30

Yunus, Muhammad, [126](#ch6.xhtml#page_126)--131,
[133](#ch6.xhtml#page_133)

incentives and, [156](#ch7.xhtml#page_156)--157

propinquity and, [189](#ch8.xhtml#page_189)--190

Zealotry, political, [96](#ch5.xhtml#page_96)--99

[]{#about.xhtml}

[]{#about.xhtml#page_225 type="pagebreak"}ABOUT THE AUTHORS {#about.xhtml#about .h2}
-----------------------------------------------------------

**Joseph Grenny** is an author, speaker, and social scientist for
business performance. He has advised leaders on every major continent,
from the boardrooms of Fortune 500 companies to the communities in
Nairobi, Kenya. He has cofounded three not-for-profit organizations:
Unitus Labs, The Other Side Academy, and The Other Side Village.

**Kerry Patterson** (1946--2022) has coauthored four award-winning
training programs and led multiple long-term change efforts in Fortune
500 organizations around the world. He is the recipient of the BYU
Marriott School of Management Dyer Award for outstanding contribution in
organizational behavior. Kerry completed doctoral work at Stanford
University.

**David Maxfield** is a leading researcher, consultant, and speaker. He
has led research studies on the role of human behavior in medical
errors, safety hazards, and project execution. He completed doctoral
work in psychology at Stanford University.

**Ron McMillan** is a leading researcher, consultant, and speaker. He
has led research studies on the role of human behavior in medical
errors, safety hazards, and project execution. He completed doctoral
work in psychology at Stanford University.

**Al Switzler** is a renowned consultant who has directed training and
management initiatives with leaders from Fortune 500 companies
worldwide. He also served on the faculty of the Executive Development
center at the University of Michigan.[]{#about.xhtml#page_226
type="pagebreak"}

[]{#bm01.xhtml}

![](Back_Matter_01.jpg)

[]{#bm02.xhtml}

![](Back_Matter_02.jpg)

[]{#bm03.xhtml}

![](Back_Matter_03.jpg)

[]{#bm04.xhtml}

![](Back_Matter_04.jpg)

[]{#cover1.xhtml}

*If you enjoyed this book, discover your next great read with the
following excerpt.*

![Cover Image](excerpt_cover.jpg)

[]{#ch1a.xhtml}

[]{#ch1a.xhtml#page_xiii type="pagebreak"} []{#ch1a.xhtml#page_xiv
type="pagebreak"} []{#ch1a.xhtml#page_1 type="pagebreak"}

::: {.b1-qt}
The single biggest problem in communication is the illusion that it has
taken place.

---GEORGE BERNARD SHAW
:::

1 {#ch1a.xhtml#ch1 .b1-h2cn}
-

WHAT'S A CRUCIAL CONVERSATION? {.b1-h2ct}
------------------------------

And Who Cares?

When people first hear the term "Crucial Conversation," many conjure up
images of presidents, emperors, and prime ministers seated around a
massive table while they debate the future. Although it's true that such
discussions have a wide-sweeping impact, they're not the only kind we
have in mind. Crucial Conversations happen to everyone. They're the
daily conversations that reshape your life.

Now, what makes one of your conversations crucial as opposed to plain
vanilla? First, *opinions vary*. For example, you're talking with your
boss about a possible promotion. She thinks you're not ready; you think
you are. Second, *stakes are high.* You're in a meeting with four
coworkers, and you're trying to pick a new marketing strategy. You've
got to do something different, or your company is in trouble. Third,
*emotions run strong*. You're in the middle of a casual discussion with
your spouse, and he or she brings up an "ugly incident" that took place
at yesterday's neighborhood party. Apparently not only did you flirt
with someone at []{#ch1a.xhtml#page_2 type="pagebreak"}the party, but
according to your spouse, "You were practically making out." You don't
remember flirting. You simply remember being polite and friendly. Your
spouse walks off in a huff.

And speaking of the party, at one point during the evening you found
yourself making small talk with the somewhat crotchety and colorful
neighbor from an adjoining apartment. One minute he's telling you all
about his shrinking kidneys; the next he's complaining about the smell
of your previous night's dinner wafting through his vent. "I'm allergic
to ginger, you know," he grouses. From that moment on, you end up in a
heated debate over whether your right to stir-fry trumps the fact that
smelling the spice makes his ears sweat. Not your most diplomatic
moment. It escalates to shouting, and the neighbor finishes by
threatening you with a culinary assault lawsuit while you storm off.
Emotions were running *really* strong.

### WHAT MAKES THESE CONVERSATIONS CRUCIAL? {.b1-h3}

What makes each of these conversations crucial---and not simply
frustrating, frightening, or annoying---is that the outcome could have a
huge impact on either relationships or results that affect you greatly.

In each of the above cases, some element of your daily routine could be
forever altered for better or worse. Clearly a promotion could make a
big difference. Your company's success affects you and everyone you work
with. Your relationship with your spouse influences every aspect of your
life. Even something as trivial as a debate over cooking smells can
damage your quality of life.

These examples, of course, are merely the tip of an enormous and ugly
iceberg of topics that can lead us into conversational disaster. Others
include:

•   Ending a relationship

•   Talking to a coworker who makes offensive comments

•   []{#ch1a.xhtml#page_3 type="pagebreak"}Asking a friend to repay a
loan

•   Giving the boss feedback about her behavior

•   Approaching a boss who's breaking his own safety or quality policies

•   Addressing racist or sexist behavior

•   Critiquing a colleague's work

•   Asking a roommate to move out

•   Resolving custody or visitation issues with an ex

•   Dealing with a rebellious teen

•   Talking to a team member who isn't keeping commitments

•   Discussing problems with sexual intimacy

•   Confronting a loved one about a substance abuse problem

•   Talking to a colleague who's hoarding information or resources

•   Giving an unfavorable performance review

•   Asking in-laws to quit interfering

•   Talking to a coworker about a personal hygiene problem

These situations cause stress and strain in our lives, and one misstep
in any of them could have huge consequences. But it doesn't have to be
this way. If you know how to handle Crucial Conversations, you can
effectively hold tough conversations about virtually any topic and
resolve the situation. But that's not what typically happens.

::: {.b1-sid}
**Crucial Conversation** (krōō shel kän´vŭr sa´ shen) *n*

A discussion between two or more people in which they hold\
(1) opposing opinions about a (2) high-stakes issue and where\
(3) emotions run strong. See [Figure 1.1](#ch1a.xhtml#fig1_1).
:::

[]{#ch1a.xhtml#page_4 type="pagebreak"}![Image](F01-01.jpg)

**Figure 1.1** The definition of a Crucial Conversation

### Lag Time Is a Factor {.b1-h3a}

In each of these examples, the determining factor between success and
failure is the amount of time that passes between when the problem
emerges and when those involved find a way to honestly and respectfully
resolve it. What we're suggesting is that the greatest damage to your
relationship with your in-laws is not due to their occasional
interference. It's the toxic emotions and dysfunctional behavior that
occurs in the absence of a forthright conversation that causes the
greatest damage. Biased behavior in your workplace is a problem, but its
impact is multiplied when people fail to confront, discuss, and resolve
the behavior. It's one thing to have a boss who fails to keep her
commitments. It's another to have the problem fester into gossip,
mistrust, and covert resentment as it echoes through hallways rather
than being frankly addressed. The real damage happens during the lag
time between people seeing her weaknesses and people addressing her
weaknesses.

Think about relationships where the lag time between when you feel a
problem and when you discuss it is short. Odds are that you would
describe these relationships as characterized by trust, productivity,
and intimacy. Now think about the reverse. Think about teams where it
can take weeks, months, or years to honestly address the elephants in
the []{#ch1a.xhtml#page_5 type="pagebreak"}room. What happens in the
absence of candid dialogue? Contention. Resentment. Gamesmanship. Poor
decisions. Spotty execution. Missed opportunities. *At the heart of
almost all chronic problems in relationships, teams, organizations, and
even nations are Crucial Conversations people either don't hold or don't
hold well.* Decades of research have led us to conclude that:

*You can measure the health of relationships, teams, and organizations
by measuring the lag time between when problems are identified and when
they are resolved.*

The only reliable path to resolving problems is to find the shortest
path to effective conversation.

### Why the Lag? How We Typically Handle Crucial Conversations {.b1-h3a}

When we face Crucial Conversations, we have three broad options:

•   We can avoid them.

•   We can face them and handle them poorly.

•   We can face them and handle them well.

That seems simple enough. Walk away from Crucial Conversations and
suffer the consequences. Handle them poorly and suffer the consequences.
Or handle them well, resolve the situation, and improve the
relationship.

"I don't know," you think to yourself. "Given the three choices, I'll go
with handling them well."

But do we handle them well? When talking turns tough, do we pause, take
a deep breath, announce to our inner selves, "Uh-oh, this discussion is
crucial. I'd better pay close attention," and then trot out our best
behavior? Sometimes. Sometimes we boldly tackle hot topics, monitor our
behavior, solve problems, and preserve relationships. Sometimes we're
just flat-out *good*.

[]{#ch1a.xhtml#page_6 type="pagebreak"}But all too often we fall into
the other two camps. The lag time between identifying a problem and
effectively resolving it grows because either we don't address it at
all, or we address it poorly and the problem persists.

### We Avoid Crucial Conversations {.b1-h3a}

Despite the importance of Crucial Conversations, we often back away from
them because we fear engaging will make matters worse. We become masters
at avoiding tough conversations. Coworkers send emails when they should
pick up the phone and talk openly. Bosses send texts rather than jumping
on a video call. Family members change the subject when an issue gets
too risky. We have one friend who learned from a Post-it note that his
life partner of 17 years was leaving him. We use all kinds of tactics to
dodge touchy issues.

Of course, there are risks in speaking up, especially to those with more
power than you. But what few of us tend to be honest with ourselves
about is the alternative to taking this risk. When it comes to Crucial
Conversations, you have only two choices:

**1.**   Talk it out.

**2.**   Act it out.

If you fail to discuss issues you have with your boss, your life
partner, your neighbor, or your peer, will those issues magically
disappear? No. Instead, they will become the lens you see the other
person through. And how you see always shows up in how you act. Your
resentment will show up in how you treat the other person. For instance,
you'll snap at the person, spend less time with him or her, be quicker
to accuse the person of dishonesty or selfishness, or withhold
information or affection. The problem will persist, and acting out your
feelings instead of talking them out will add strain to an already
crucial situation. The longer the lag time during which you act out your
feelings rather than talk them out, the more damage you'll do to both
relationships and results.

### []{#ch1a.xhtml#page_7 type="pagebreak"}We Handle Them Poorly {.b1-h3a}

On the flip side of avoidance, we have the problem of handling Crucial
Conversations poorly. Often in these tough moments, we're at our
absolute worst---we exaggerate; we yell; we withdraw; we say things we
later regret. The sad irony of Crucial Conversations is that *when it
matters most, we tend to do our worst*.

Why is that?

**We're designed wrong.** When conversations turn from routine to
crucial, our instincts conspire against us. Strong emotions don't
exactly prepare us to converse effectively. Countless generations of
genetic shaping drive humans to react to interpersonal threats the same
way we deal with physical ones. Our natural tendencies in moments that
seem threatening lean toward fight or flight rather than listen and
speak.

For instance, consider a typical Crucial Conversation. Someone says
something you disagree with about a topic that matters a great deal to
you, and your body registers the threat. Your body's instinct is to
prepare you for physical safety. Two tiny organs seated neatly atop your
kidneys pump adrenaline into your bloodstream. Your brain diverts blood
from activities it deems nonessential (like thoughtfully and
respectfully opening a conversation) to high-priority survival tasks
(such as hitting and running). As the large muscles of the arms and legs
get *more* blood, the higher-level reasoning sections of your brain get
*less*. As a result, you end up facing challenging conversations with
the same intellectual equipment available to a rodent. Your body is
preparing to deal with an attacking saber-toothed tiger, not your boss,
neighbor, or loved ones.

**We're under pressure.** Frequently, Crucial Conversations come out of
nowhere. And since you're caught by surprise, you're forced to conduct
an extraordinarily complex interaction in real time---no books, no
coaches, and certainly no short breaks while a team of diplomats runs to
your aid and pumps you full of suave ideas.

[]{#ch1a.xhtml#page_8 type="pagebreak"}What *do* you have to work with?
The issue at hand, the other person, and a brain that's drunk on
adrenaline and almost incapable of rational thought. It's little wonder
we often say and do things that make perfect sense in the moment but
later on seem, well, stupid.

"What was I thinking?" you wonder---when what you should be asking is
"What part of my brain was I thinking with?"

The truth is, you were trying to solve a complex interpersonal problem
with a brain designed to do little more than assure your survival.
You're lucky you didn't suffer a stroke.

**We're stumped.** We don't know where to start with approaching a
Crucial Conversation effectively. We're making this up as we go along
because few of us have seen real-life models of effective communication
skills. Let's say that you actually planned for a tough
conversation---maybe you've even mentally rehearsed. You feel prepared,
and you're as cool as a cucumber. Will you succeed? Not if you haven't
seen what true success looks like. Practice doesn't make perfect;
*perfect* practice makes perfect.

This means that first you have to know what to practice. You've probably
had ample opportunity to see what *not* to do---as modeled by friends,
colleagues, and, yes, even your parents. In fact, you may have sworn
time and again not to act the same way. You've watched your dad nod and
sulk while his mother critiqued his life choices. Your mom taught you by
example to respond to unkindness with biting sarcasm. And your first
boss's favorite maxim was "If you can't say something nice, don't say
anything at all." At least until the person he couldn't say something
nice about left the room.

With no healthy models, what do you do? You do what most people do. You
wing it. You piece together the words, try to make them sound
nonthreatening, and hope the other person agrees with your perspective
right away. But since you have no real idea of how to bring
[]{#ch1a.xhtml#page_9 type="pagebreak"}up the topic safely or respond to
the other person's arguments, your attempts tend to fall short, and the
lag time grows.

**We act in self-defeating ways.** Sometimes in our doped-up,
dumbed-down state, the strategies we choose for dealing with our Crucial
Conversations are perfectly designed to keep us from what we actually
want. We're our own worst enemies. Here's how this works.

Let's say your significant other has been paying less and less attention
to you. You realize he or she has a busy job, but you still would like
more time together. You drop a few hints about the issue, but your loved
one doesn't handle it well. You decide not to put on added pressure, so
you clam up. Of course, since you're not all that happy with the
arrangement, your displeasure now comes out through an occasional
sarcastic remark: "Another late night, huh? I've got Facebook friends I
feel closer to."

Unfortunately (and here's where the problem becomes self-defeating), the
more you snip and snap, the less your loved one wants to be around you.
So he or she spends less time with you, you become even more upset, and
the spiral continues. Your behavior is now actually creating the very
thing you didn't want in the first place. You're caught in an unhealthy,
self-defeating loop.

Or maybe you have a roommate---we'll call him Terry---who shamelessly
wears your and your other roommates' clothes without asking. In fact,
one day while walking out the door, he glibly announces that he's
wearing something from each of your closets. You see Taylor's pants,
Scott's shirt, and even Chris's new matching shoes-and-socks ensemble.
What of *yours* could he possibly be wearing? Eew!

Your response, quite naturally, is to bad-mouth Terry behind his back.
That is, until one day when he overhears you belittling him to a friend.
You're so embarrassed, you avoid being around him. And now when you're
out of the apartment, he wears your clothes, eats your food, and uses
your laptop out of spite.

[]{#ch1a.xhtml#page_10 type="pagebreak"}Let's try another example.
You're a woman on a project team run by a man. Over the past two months
you've noticed that when men on the team offer ideas in brainstorming
meetings, he responds with "Good comment" and a thoughtful nod. When a
woman offers an idea, he rarely makes eye contact and offers a soft
"OK." After the first meeting where it happened, you were curious. You
had a sense that it would be helpful to call it to his attention; still,
you decided against it for fear of offending him so early in the
project. After you saw the behavior again in the second meeting, you
were convinced not just that it was a pattern, but that he was likely
incorrigible. By the eighth time you saw the pattern, you felt hot rage
shoot through your spine. He has noted your sullen seething and has
decided you either don't respect him or, worse, are actively undermining
his project. Rather than exploring his concerns with you, he nurses them
into a full-fledged indictment. As a result, he rarely looks in your
direction during meetings and takes your potentially constructive
comments as personal attacks.

In both cases, you're caught in a self-defeating loop. The more the two
of you choose to continue your agitated silence, the more you both
create the very behaviors the other despises.

In each of these examples of unhealthy downward spirals, the stakes were
moderate to high, opinions differed, and emotions ran strong. In a
couple of the examples, the stakes were fairly low at first, but with
time and growing emotions, the relationships soured and quality of life
suffered---driving the stakes up.

### There Is Hope {.b1-h3a}

So what's the solution to stepping up to these conversations and
effectively resolving the situations before they drag out and grow to
unmanageable levels?

The answer is to gain the skills needed to successfully address and
resolve these relationships through Crucial Conversations. When
[]{#ch1a.xhtml#page_11 type="pagebreak"}you're confident in the skills
you need, you won't hesitate to step up to these conversations. You'll
know that a good outcome is possible, and you'll be able to create a
scenario where everyone involved feels safe discussing his or her
concerns. The rest of the book is concerned with teaching you skills to
achieve these positive outcomes.

For now, let's look at how having those skills impacts every area of
your life for the better.

::: {.b1-sid}
![Image](Icon_Video.jpg)

WORKING THROUGH DIVORCE

The skills you'll learn in this book will help you approach some of the
most pivotal moments in your life. Coauthor Emily Gregory relied on
these skills in the face of a life-changing decision, and they made all
the difference. View her story in the video *Working Through Divorce*
and learn about the power of Crucial Conversations skills at
[crucialconversations.com](https://www.crucialconversations.com).
:::

### THE RESEARCH: HOW CRUCIAL CONVERSATIONS SKILLS IMPROVE YOUR LIFE {.b1-h3}

Strong relationships, careers, organizations, and communities all draw
from the same source of power---the ability to talk openly about
high-stakes, emotional, controversial topics.

The following is a small sampling of the decades of research that
brought us to this important insight.

### Increase Your Influence {.b1-h3a}

Could the ability to master Crucial Conversations help your career?
Absolutely. In a series of studies across 17 organizations, we
identified []{#ch1a.xhtml#page_12 type="pagebreak"}thousands of what we
call "opinion leaders." We'll cover more on what this term means in the
next chapter. For now, just know that these were individuals who were
admired by peers and bosses alike for their competence and insight. One
of the most commonly cited skills people associated with them was their
ability to raise emotionally and politically risky issues in a way that
others couldn't. Colleagues envied their ability to speak truth to those
in power. When people weren't sure how to let those in upper management
know they were out of touch with reality, more often than not it was
these skillful women and men who shrank the lag time.

We've all seen people hurt their careers by ineffectively discussing
tough issues. You may have done it yourself. Fed up with a lengthy and
unhealthy pattern of behavior, you finally speak out---but a bit too
abruptly. Oops. Or maybe an issue becomes so hot that as your peers
twitch and fidget themselves into a quivering mass of potential stroke
victims, you decide to say something. It's not a pretty discussion---but
somebody has to have the guts to keep the boss from doing something
stupid. (Gulp.)

Without realizing it, from the time we are three or four years old, most
of us come to the dangerous conclusion that we often have to choose
between telling the truth and keeping a friend. Lag time becomes a way
of life as we procrastinate, putting off conversations that might
otherwise lead to resolution and stronger relationships. Instead, we
build resentment and alienation as we act out rather than talk out our
concerns.

People who routinely hold Crucial Conversations and hold them well are
able to express controversial and even risky opinions in a way that gets
heard. Their bosses, peers, and direct reports listen without becoming
defensive or angry.

Time and again we've watched opinion leaders find ways to both tell the
truth and keep relationships. We marveled as we watched them
[]{#ch1a.xhtml#page_13 type="pagebreak"}step up to conversations in ways
that actually made working relationships stronger. We discovered that
the only way to really strengthen relationships is *through* the truth,
not *around* it.

What about *your* career? Are there Crucial Conversations that you're
not holding or not holding well? Is this undermining your influence? And
more importantly, would your career take a step forward if you could
improve how you're dealing with these conversations?

### Improve Your Organization {.b1-h3a}

Is it possible that an organization's performance could hang on
something as soft and gushy as how individuals deal with Crucial
Conversations?

Study after study suggests that the answer is *yes*.

We began our work 30 years ago looking for what we called *crucial
moments*. We wondered, "Are there a handful of moments when someone's
actions *disproportionately affect* key performance indicators?" And if
so, what are those moments, and how should we act when they occur?

It was that search that led us to Crucial Conversations. We've found
that more often than not, the world changes when people have to deal
with a very risky issue and either do it poorly or do it well. For
example:

**Silence kills.** A doctor is getting ready to insert a central IV line
into a patient but fails to put on the proper gloves, gown, and mask to
ensure the procedure is done as safely as possible. After the nurse
reminds the doctor of the proper protections, the doctor ignores her
comment and begins the insertion. In a study of over 7,000 doctors and
nurses, we've found caregivers face this crucial moment all the time. In
fact, 84 percent of respondents said that they regularly see people
taking shortcuts, exhibiting incompetence, or breaking rules.

[]{#ch1a.xhtml#page_14 type="pagebreak"}*And that's not the problem!*

The real problem is that those who observe deviations or infractions
*say nothing*. Across the world we've found that the odds of a nurse
speaking up in this crucial moment are less than 1 in 12. The odds of
doctors stepping up to similar Crucial Conversations aren't much better.

And when they don't speak up, when they don't hold an effective Crucial
Conversation, it impacts critical results like patient safety, nursing
turnover, physician satisfaction, and nursing productivity.

**Silence fails.** When it comes to the corporate world, the most common
complaint of executives and managers is that their people work in silos.
They are great at tasks they can handle entirely within their team.
Unfortunately, close to 80 percent of the projects that require
cross-functional cooperation *cost far more than expected, produce less
than hoped for, and run significantly over budget*. We wondered why.

So we studied over 2,200 projects and programs that had been rolled out
at hundreds of organizations worldwide. The findings were stunning. You
can predict months or years in advance with nearly 90 percent accuracy
which projects will fail. *The* predictor of success or failure was
whether people could hold specific, relevant Crucial Conversations. For
example, could they speak up if they thought the scope and schedule were
unrealistic? Or did they go silent when a cross-functional team member
began sloughing off? Or even more tricky---what should they do when an
executive failed to provide leadership for the effort?

In most organizations we studied, employees fell silent when these
crucial moments hit. Fortunately, in those organizations where people
were able to candidly and effectively speak up about these concerns, the
projects were less than half as likely to fail. When a project failed,
problems showed up in key performance indicators such as spiraling
costs, late delivery times, and low morale. But our research
[]{#ch1a.xhtml#page_15 type="pagebreak"}showed that the underlying cause
was the unwillingness or inability to speak up at crucial moments.

Other studies we've conducted show that companies with employees who are
skilled at Crucial Conversations:

![Image](line.jpg)

•   Respond five times faster to financial downturns---and make budget
adjustments far more intelligently---than less-skilled peers.

•   Are two-thirds more likely to avoid injury and death due to unsafe
conditions.

•   Save over \$1,500 and an eight-hour workday for every Crucial
Conversation employees hold rather than avoid.

•   Substantially increase trust and reduce transaction costs in virtual
work teams. Those who can't handle their Crucial Conversations suffer
(through backstabbing, gossip, undermining, passive aggression, etc.) up
to three times more often in virtual teams than in colocated teams.

•   Influence change in colleagues who are bullying, conniving,
dishonest, or incompetent. When over 4,000 respondents were asked, 93
percent of them said that, in their organization, people like this are
almost "untouchable"---staying in their position four years or longer
without being held accountable.

Most leaders get it wrong. They think that organizational productivity
and performance are simply about policies, processes, structures, or
systems. So when their software product doesn't ship on time, they
benchmark others' development processes. Or when productivity flags,
they tweak their performance management system. When teams aren't
cooperating, they restructure.

Our research shows that these types of nonhuman changes fail more often
than they succeed. That's because the real problem lies
[]{#ch1a.xhtml#page_16 type="pagebreak"}not in implementing a new
process, but in getting people to hold one another accountable to the
process. And that requires Crucial Conversations skills.

In the *worst* companies, poor performers are first ignored and then
transferred. In *good* companies, bosses eventually deal with problems.
In the *best* companies, everyone holds everyone else
accountable---regardless of level or position. The path to high
productivity passes not through a static system, but through
face-to-face conversations.

So what about you? Is your organization stuck in its progress toward
some important goal? What is the typical lag time in your organization
between identifying and discussing politically or emotionally risky
issues? Do people step up to or walk away from Crucial Conversations?
Could you take a big step forward by shrinking your typical lag time?

### Strengthen Your Relationships {.b1-h3a}

Could failed Crucial Conversations lead to failed relationships? When
you ask the average person what causes couples to break up, he or she
usually suggests that it's due to differences of opinion. You know,
people have different preferences about managing their finances, spicing
up their love lives, or rearing their children.

In truth, *everyone* argues about important issues. But not everyone
splits up. It's *how* you argue that matters.

For example, when psychologist Howard Markman examined couples in the
throes of heated discussions, he learned that people fall into three
categories---those who digress into threats and name-calling, those who
revert to silent fuming, and those who speak openly, honestly, and
effectively.

After observing couples for hundreds of hours, Markman and his research
partner Clifford Notarius predicted relationship outcomes and tracked
their research subjects' relationships for the next decade. Remarkably,
they predicted nearly 90 percent of the divorces that
[]{#ch1a.xhtml#page_17 type="pagebreak"}occurred.^1^ But more
importantly, they found that helping couples learn to hold Crucial
Conversations more effectively reduced the chance of unhappiness or
breakup by more than half!

Now what about you? Think of your own important relationships. Are there
a few Crucial Conversations that you're currently avoiding or handling
poorly? Do you walk away from some issues only to charge recklessly into
others? Do you hold in ugly opinions only to have them tumble out as
sarcastic remarks or cheap shots? When it matters the most (after all,
these are your cherished loved ones), are you on your worst behavior? If
so, you definitely have something to gain by learning more about how to
handle Crucial Conversations.

### Boost Your Personal Health {.b1-h3a}

If the evidence so far isn't compelling enough, what would you say if we
told you that the ability to master Crucial Conversations is a key to a
healthier and longer life?

**Immune systems.** Consider the groundbreaking research done by Dr.
Janice Kiecolt-Glaser and Dr. Ronald Glaser. They studied the immune
systems of couples who had been married an average of 42 years by
comparing those who argued constantly with those who resolved their
differences effectively. It turns out that arguing for decades *doesn't*
lessen the destructive blow of constant conflict. Quite the contrary.
Those who routinely failed their Crucial Conversations had far weaker
immune systems and worse health than those who found a way to resolve
them well.^2^

**Life-threatening diseases.** In perhaps the most revealing of all the
health-related studies, a group of subjects who had contracted malignant
melanoma received traditional treatment and then were divided into two
groups. One group met weekly for only six weeks; the other did not.
Facilitators taught the first group of recovering patients specific
communication skills.

[]{#ch1a.xhtml#page_18 type="pagebreak"}After meeting only six times and
then dispersing for five years, the subjects who learned how to express
themselves effectively had a higher survival rate---only 9 percent
succumbed as opposed to almost 30 percent in the untrained group.^3^
Think about the implications of this study. Just a modest improvement in
the ability to talk and connect with others corresponded to a two-thirds
decrease in the death rate.

This study is just one sample of how the way you talk or don't talk can
dramatically affect your health. Mountains of research suggest that the
negative feelings we hold in and the emotional pain we suffer as we
stumble our way through unhealthy conversations slowly eat away at our
health. In some cases, the impact of failed conversations leads to minor
problems. In others, it results in disaster. In all cases, failed
conversations never make us happier, healthier, or better off.

![Image](line.jpg)

So how about you? What are the specific conversations that gnaw at you
the most? Which conversations (if you held them or improved them) would
strengthen your immune system, help ward off disease, and increase your
quality of life and well-being?

### SUMMARY: WHAT'S A CRUCIAL CONVERSATION? {.b1-h3}

When stakes are high, opinions vary, and emotions start to run strong,
casual conversations transform into crucial ones. Ironically, the more
crucial the conversation, the less likely we are to handle it well. When
we fail a Crucial Conversation, every aspect of our lives can be
affected--- from our companies, to our careers, to our communities, to
our relationships, to our personal health. And the longer the lag time,
the more room for mischief.

[]{#ch1a.xhtml#page_19 type="pagebreak"}But there is good news. As we
learn how to step up to Crucial Conversations---and handle them
well---with one set of high-leverage skills we can influence virtually
every domain of our lives.

What is this all-important skill set? What do people who sail through
Crucial Conversations actually do? More importantly, can we do it too?
